II. THE JEWEL OF THE BUDDHA

Hereafter we should explain the meaning of Ślokas (basic verses). Those living beings who were
lead by the Tathāgata, while taking their refuge in the Tathāgata, also take refuge in
the Doctrine and Community through the faith as the natural outflow of the Reality. Therefore,
first of all, there is one śloka with regard to the Jewel of The Buddha.

(Kārikā 1) I bow to the one, who has realized the Buddhahood Which has neither beginning, middle
nor end, and is quiescent, And who, having realized himself, taught the Path, Fearless
and eternal, in order to enlighten the ignorant, And who, having in hand the excellent sword
and thunderbolt Of Wisdom and Mercy, cuts in pieces all sprouts of Sufferings, And breaks
the wall of doubts concealed In the forest of various views. || 4 ||(§1. The Eightfold
Quality of the Buddhahood.) What is shown by this [śloka]? Being immutable, free from efforts
And not being dependent upon the others, [Also] Being endowed with Wisdom, Compassion
and [supernatural] Power [imparted by both], The Buddhahood has two kinds of benefit. ||
5 ||

By this verse there has been briefly explained the Buddhahood as being contracted by eight qualities.
Which are the 8 qualities? Namely, 1) Immutability, 2) being free from any effort,
3) Enlightenment, not dependent on others, 4) Wisdom, 5) Compassion, 6) [supernatural]
power, 7) fulfilment of self-benefit, and 8) fulfilment of benefit for others.

As having neither beginning, middle nor end by nature, It is immutable; Being the body of quiet
character, It is free from any effort, thus remembered by tradition. || 6 ||Being realized
by oneself. It is cognizable without any help of others; Thus awakened in a threefold
way, it is Wisdom, Because of preaching the way, it is Compassion. || 7 ||It is Power because
of destroying Suffering and Defilements by Wisdom and Compassion; By the first three
qualities, benefit for oneself, And by the latter three, benefit for others [is indicated].
|| 8 ||

1) asaṃskṛta: The word ‘immutable’ should be understood as being opposite to being conditioned
or caused. Here ‘being conditioned’ means the thing, of which origination, lasting, as
well as destruction are conceivable. Because of the absence of these characteristics, the
Buddhahood should be seen as having neither beginning, middle nor end, and being represented
as the immutable Absolute Body.2) anābhoga: It is free from efforts because all dualistic
views and false discriminations have ceased to exist.3) aparapratyaya_abhisaṃbodhi: It
is ‘enlightened without any help of others‘ because it is realized through one’s innate knowledge.
Here the word ‘udaya‘ means ‘perfect enlightenment‘, in which the sense’ origination’
is implied. Thus, as being Tathāgata, though it is immutable and of the characteristic
of non-activity, the whole action of the Perfectly Enlightened One proceeds without any
effort, ceaselessly and uninterruptedly as far as the world exists.

4) Jñāna, 5) karuṇā, & 6) śakti: Thus, not having heard the Buddhahood, which is a quite marvellous
and unthinkable sphere, from somebody else, but having perfectly cognized its unutterable
nature ‘by one self’, i.e. by means of self-born knowledge which needs no teacher,
and, with respect to his comprehension, in order to enlighten the others too, who are ignorant
and blind by birth, [the Buddha] has preached the path to follow that [Buddhahood].
Therefore, [the Buddha] should be understood as being endowed with the supreme Wisdom and
Compassion.The fearlessness of Path is due to its transcendency. The transcendency is due
to its never again being turned back. With respect to their abolition of the roots of others’
Suffering and Defilement, the power of Wisdom and of Compassion of the Tathāgata, is explained
by means of the examples of sword and thunderbolt, respectively.Of these, the root
of Suffering is, in short, one kind of origination of Individuality on the [three] existences.
The root of Defilement is anything which is based on the prejudice to the individual
existence, i. e. wrong view and doubt.Here, the Suffering, as being contracted in the Individuality,
should be regarded as having the state of sprout because of its character of
origination. As having the character of cutting it, it should be known that the Buddha’s power
of both Wisdom and Compassion is illustrated by an example of sword.The Defilement, which
is contracted in wrong view and doubt and is to be destroyed by the Path of true perception,
is difficult to be understood and hardly to be overcome by means of mundane knowledge.
Thence, it is akin to the wall concealed by a thick forest. As having the character of
breaking, it should be known that Buddha’s Power of both Wisdom and Compassion is illustrated
by an example of thunderbolt.

(§2. Reference to the Jñānālokālaṅkāra-Sūtra.) Thus, the six qualities of the Tathāgata mentioned
above should be understood by this very order and with detailed and analytical explanation,
according to the Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokālaṃkāra-Sūtra.In that Sūtra, it is
said as follows: “O Mañjuśrī, he who is of no origination or destruction is (i.e. has the
epithets) the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One”. By this, first of all,
it is explained that the Tathāgata is of immutable character.And immediately after this,
by nine illustrations beginning with the illustration of a reflection of the Indra on the
surface of an immaculate Vaiḍūrya stone, with reference to this very meaning of the Tathāgata’s
being neither originated nor destructed, it is said as follows:“Thus, Mañjuśrī, the
Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One neither moves nor produces any thought,
neither explains in a dualistic way nor imagines falsely nor discriminates. He is unimaginable,
indiscriminative, devoid of thinking and minding, of quiescent character, of neither
origination nor destruction. He cannot be seen, or heard, or smelt, or tested, or touched
and has no characteristic remark, has neither making known nor being made known.” and
so forth. Such is the explanation of various kinds of aspects of quiescence.By this it is
indicated that, in his own acts, all dualistic views and false discriminations have ceased
to exist; hence, the Tathāgata is free from efforts. After this, i.e. after the explanation
of [nine] illustrations, there is explained by the remaining texts the Tathāgata’s perfect
enlightenment realized without any help of others with respect to all the gates to the
Perfect Enlightenment of the real nature of all elements.And after this, with reference
to the Tathāgata’s 16 kinds of Enlightenment, it is said as follows: “There, O Mañjuśrī, as
soon as the Tathāgata has enlightened all the elements of such a nature and has observed
the Essential nature of all living beings as ‘impure‘ ‘not removing stains‘ and ‘blemished‘,
the Great Compassion named ‘mastery’ sets in forth on all living beings”.By this the Tathāgata’s
pośession of Supreme Wisdom and Compassion is demonstrated. There, “all the elements
of such a nature” means ‘[all the elements, having the nature] as has been said before’,
i.e. the character of non-existence. “Having enlightened” means ‘having known truly by
means of Buddha’s non-discriminative Wisdom’.“Of [all] living beings” means ‘of those [living
beings] who are in the state of conformed [in right way], unconformed and wrongly conformed
groups’. “Essential nature” means ‘the Matrix of the Tathāgata, which is not different
from his own quality by nature’“Having observed” means ‘having perceived all kinds (i.e.
impure, etc.) through the Buddha’s eye to which nothing is obscure’. “Impure” means ‘[impure
nature] of the ignorant and common people’ because of obstruction caused by Moral Defilement.“Not
removing stains” means ‘[stainful nature] of the Śravakas and Pratyekabuddhas’
because of obstruction on account of knowable things. “Blemished” means ‘[blemished nature]
of Bodhisattvas’, because of [their] retaining [the impression of] one of both [obstructions].
[The Compassion is “named] mastery” because it enters well into the gates of accomplished
means of training in various ways.“The great Compassion sets forth on all living
beings”, because [the Buddha], having realized the characteristics of all living beings
through equality, has the intention to lead [the living beings] to the acquisition of their
own nature.After this, i.e. having aroused the supreme Wisdom and Compassion, [the Buddha]
has no relaxation of activity for effectuating the setting in motion of the Wheel of unparalleled
Doctrine. This [activity] should be known as ‘power’ of both [Wisdom and Compassion]
in regard of acting for the sake of others.7) Sva_arthasaṃpad & 8) para_arthasaṃpad:
Here, of these six qualities of the Tathāgata, according to order [the quality] connected
with the first three qualities, immutable, etc. is ‘the fulfilment of self-benefit’, and
[the quality connected with] the remaining three, Wisdom, etc. is ‘the fulfilment of benefit
for others’.Besides [there is another meaning]. By the word ‘Wisdom’, the fulfilment of
self-benefit is designated, in so far as the highest, eternal and quiescent place has the
character of being the basis of his own perfect enlightenment. By the words ‘Compassion’
and ‘Power’, the fulfilment of benefit for others is designated, because of their character
of being the basis for setting forth the Wheel of the highest and greatest Doctrine.

