I. Introduction

The Buddha, the doctrine, and the community, The Essence [of the Buddha], the Supreme Enlightenment,
The Virtuous Qualities [of the Buddha]; - These are the Admantine Subjects, [which
show] Briefly, the body of the whole text.

The word ‘vajrapada’ (admantine subject) means the term, i.e. the basis, which expresses the
meaning of the Enlightenment which is similar to a thunderbolt [or diamond]. Here, it being
difficult to be penetrated by the knowledge consisting in studying and thinking, the meaning
[of the Enlightenment] which is not capable of being explained but is to be realized
by oneself, should be understood as ‘like a thunderbolt’.Those letters, which express that
meaning by making manifest the way which is favorable for its acquisition, are called ‘pada’,
just because they are the basis of that meaning. Thus, by both meanings, i.e. being
hard to be penetrated and being the basis, the character of ‘vajrapada’, of the meaning as
well as of the letters, is to be understood.Now, what is ‘artha’, (the meaning) and what
is ‘vyañjana’ (the letter)? ‘artha’ is the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment, viz. 1)
the Buddha, 2) the Doctrine, 3) the Community, 4) the Essence of the Buddha, 5) the Supreme
Enlightenment, 6) The Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha, and 7) the Acts of the Buddha.
These are called ‘artha’.The letters, by which the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment
is indicated or is manifested, are called ‘vyañjana’. And this teaching of ‘vajrapada’ should
be understood in detail according to the Sūtras.

1) ‘Buddha’: “Verily, O Ānanda, invisible is the Tathāgata. He cannot be seen by eyes”. 2) ‘Dharma’:
“Verily, O Ānanda, unutterable is the Doctrine. It cannot be heard by ears”. 3) ‘Saṃgha’:
“Verily, O Ānanda, the Holy Community is of an immutable character. It cannot be
comletely served, either by body or by mind”. These are the [first] three vajrapadas, which
are to be understood according to the Dṛḍādhyāśaya-parivarta.‘Dhātu’: “Verily, O Śāriputra,
this meaning is the subject for the Tathāgata [and only belongs to] the sphere of the
Tathāgata. This meaning, O Śāriputra, can neither be known nor be seen, nor be examined correctly
through the knowledge of the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas. Needless to say, this
applies to the case of ignorant and ordinary beings, except when they have faith in the
Tathāgata. O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is really approachable only by faith [in the Tathāhata].
O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is a synonym of the mass of living beings.The mass
of living beings is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Matrix of the Tathāgata.
The Matrix of the Tathāgata is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body”.
Thus is the forth ‘vajrapada’ and is to be understood according to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa-parivarta.

‘Bodhi’: “O Lord, the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment is a synonym of the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa.
Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata”.
Thus is the fifth Vajrapada which is to be understood according to the Ārya Śrīmālā-sūtra.

‘Guṇa’: “O Śāriputra, that which is called Absolute Body, preached by the Tathāgata, is of indivisible
nature, of qualities inseparable from the Wisdom, that is to say, [indivisible
from or endowed] with the properties of the Buddha which far surpass the particles of sands
of the Gaṅgā in number”. This is the sixth Varjrapada and is to be understood according
to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa.

‘Karman’: “O Mañjuśri, the Tathāgata never imagines anything nor distinguishes falsely. That
is to say, his acts of this kind flow forth without any effort, without any imagination or
any thought construction”. This is the seventh Vajrapada which is to be understood according
to the Tathāgataguṇajñānācintyaviṣayāvatāranirdeśa. In short, these are the Vajrapadas
which should be known as the body of this whole text, in the sense of being a collection
of preliminary explanations.

(The Essential Character of the subjects.) Of these [seven subjects], Accompanied by their own
characteristics, one should know respectively the first three subjects From the introductory
chapter in the Dhāraṇirājasūtra And the [latter] four from [the chapter on] the distinction]
Between the qualities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha || 2x ||

[the meaning of this verse is as follows]: And of these seven Vajrapadas, accompanied by the
explanation of their own characteristics, the three subjects should be known as being from
the introductory chapter (nidāna-parivarta) of the Holy Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra, and then
the remaining four [are to be known] from the chapter on the distinction between the qualities
of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha respectively. Therefore, it is said:

“The Lord has has perfectly realized the equality of all things, has set the wheel of Doctrine
going well and has kindly trained numberless disciples”.By these three fundamental sentences,
respectively, one should know the arrangement of the three Jewels [in the aspect of]
their successive origination and accomplishment. The remaining four subjects are to be known
as the statement of the accomplishment of the causes which correspond to the origin of
the three Jewels.Now, on the 8th Stage of Bodhisattva, as the power of controlling all elements
of phenomena has been attained, so it is said: “He (=The Lord), sitting in the exellent
Seat of Enlightenment, realized perfectly the equality of all things.On the 9th Stage
of Bodhisattva, he is endowed with the power of expressing the Highest Doctrine, knows easily
the intentions of all living beings, brings all faculties [of living beings] to the
highest perfection and becomes an expert in the removal of the chain of Defiling forces in
all living beings. Therefore it is said: “Having realized the perfect Enlightenment, he has
well set the wheel of Doctrine going”.On the 10th Stage of Bodhisattva, after attaining
the anoitment for the prince recognized as the next king in the highest religious empire
of the Buddha, he is immediately calmed in the Buddha’s effortless acts uninterruptedly. Therefore
it is said: “He who well set the wheel of Doctrine going has kindly trained numberless
disciples”.Furthermore, the same qualification of having trained numberless disciples
is shown in the same text, immediately after this sentence. It runs as follows: “He was
together with the assembly of a large number of monks, and with the assembly of numberless
Bodhisattvas”.As he has well trained those who are in the enlightenment of the Śrāvaka and
up to that of the Buddha, step by step, it is said: “Thus being endowed with the virtuous
qualities,...” &c.

And then immediately after the [passage of the] doctrine on the nature of qualities of Śrāvakas
and Bodhisattvas, in the reference to the Buddha’s inconceivable leadership in regard
to tranquility, the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Buddha
is known to be through the accomplishment of the great palace adorned with circular ornament
of jewels, through bringing his people together into the assembly of Tathāgatas, through
the completion of various kinds of worship with divine beings, and through the pouring
of rain from the cloud of praises.And next, through the splendid arrangement of the seat
of the Doctrine and its brightness, and through the glorification of the name and qualities
of the various doctrines, there should be known the establishment of the distinguishable
qualities of the Jewel of the Doctrine.And next, in the light of the mutual manifestation
of the power of the acting sphere of various tranquilities of the Bodhisattvas, and in
the light of the description of their various forms of qualities, there should be known the
establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Community.And again,
immediately after this, in the reference to the Buddha’s presentation of the highest fearlessness
and confidence [in speech] on account of the prince of the supreme religious king
[to the Bodhisattvas], through the sprinkling of the Buddha’s light. And through the explanation
of the highest praise to the true virtues of the Tathāgata,through the description
in the form of discussion of the highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, and, as the result
of that knowledge, and through the manifestation of the attainment of the highest sovereignty;
through these three, respectively, the highest establishment of the distinguishable
qualities of three Jewels is to be understood.

And also therein the introductory chapter of this Sūtra, The Essence of the Buddha is explained
by a description of the sixtyfold appliance as the purifying factors of that Essence.
Because the Essence of the Buddha deserves to be applied the purification, in so far as it
has qualities of an object to be purified.And because of the effect of this meaning, in the
10 Stages of Bodhisattva, there is illustrated again an analogy of the purifying process
of gold. In this Sūtra (the Dhāraṇirāja-sūtra) too, after the description of the Acts of
the Buddha, the allegory of unpurified Vaiḍūrya stone is illustrated.

It runs as follows: “O noble youth, take for instance a skilful jewel-maker who knows quite
well how to purify precious stones. Having taken out an unpurified precious stone from the
mine, and having washed it with acid salt water, he then polishes it by rubbing with blackhair
cloth.But with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having washed
the stone with meat juice of bitter taste, he polishes it by rubbing with a woollen
blanket.Even with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having washed
it with great medical liquid, he polishes it with closely-woven cotton cloth. After having
been polished and having been separated from all impure metals mingled with it, it is
called a precious Vaiḍūrya stone.Similarly, O noble youth, the Tathāgata too, having known
the unpurified element of living beings, creates disgust in the mind of those living beings
who are attached to the world of transmigration through the teaching of being afraid of
the non-eternity, suffering, impersonality and impurity [of this world], and causes them
to enter the discipline of the sacred Doctrine.After that, he makes them realize the guiding
manner of the Tathāgata by the teaching of [the threefold gate to the emancipation, viz.]
non-substantiality, non-distinction and desirelessness.Even with this much of act, the
Tathāgata never ceases to make efforts. After that, through the teaching of the irreversible
wheel of the Doctrine and through the teaching of the ‘purification of three circles’,
he causes those living beings who have different kinds of characteristics and origins, to
enter the sphere of the Tathāgata. Having entered [the sphere of the Tathāgata], those same
beings, when they have realized the true nature of the Tathāgata, are called unparalleled
venerables”.Having in view this Essence of the Tathāgata, which is of pure origin, it is
said as follows:

“Just as gold, though it is invisible among stones and sands, Comes to be seen by the process
of purification, Similarly, in this world of living beings The Tathāgata [becomes visible
by purification]“.

Now, which are the sixty fold factors of purifying process of the Essence of Buddhahood? They
are, namely, (1) kinds of ornament of Bodhisattvas, (2) 8 kinds of illumination of Bodhisattvas,
(3) 16 kinds of Bodhisattva’s great Compassion, and (4) 32 kinds of Bodhisattva’s
deeds.

Immediately after this statement, there is explained the Supreme Enlightenment of the Buddha
by indicating the 16 kinds of Great Compassion [imparted by] the Supreme Enlightenment. Next
to this description, there is explained the Buddha’s Virtuous Qualities by the indication
of 10 Powers, kinds of Intrepidity and 18 Exclusive Properties of the Buddha.And next,
the Acts of the Buddha are explained by the indication of 32 kinds of Supreme Acts of the
Buddha. Thus, these Vajrapadas should be understood in detail through the indication of their
own characters according to the Sūtra.

(The Inherent Connection between Subjects.) And then, what is the inherent connection between
these subjects? From the Buddha comes the Doctrine, Owing to the Doctrine there is the Holy
community, In the community exist the Matrix, which is The element of Wisdom, aiming at
its acquisition; Its acquisition of the Wisdom is the Supreme Enlightenment, Which is endowed
with the Qualities, 10 Powers and others, And accompanied by altruistic Acts for all
living beings. || 3 || Finished [the explanation of] the relation between each subject in
the text.

