IV. THE JEWEL OF THE COMMUNITY

Now, from the Jewel of the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, there arises the Jewel of the Community
of Bodhisattvas who are abiding in the irreversible state. Therefore, immediately after
[the explanation of] the former, we have one śloka referring to the latter.

(Kārikā 3) I bow before those who, having understood perfectly The extremity of non-substantiality
of all the worlds as quiescent, Because of their perception of the unreality of defilements
Through the brightness of the innate pure mind of all the world, Perceive the Buddhahood
penetrating everywhere; Those whose intellect is unobscured, And whose eye of Wisdom
has its objects In the pureness and infinitude of the living beings. || 13 ||(§1. Manner
and Extent of the Perception of the Community.) What is shown by this śloka? Because of
its purity of perception by introspective knowledge, So far as its manner and extent are concerned,
The Community of irreversible Bodhisattvas [Is endowed] with the supreme qualities.
|| 14 ||

By this it is explained, in brief, that the Jewel of the Community of irreversible Bodhisattvas
is endowed with supreme qualities, because of its purity of perception by supermundane
knowledge, with respect to two aspects, [manner and extent] i.e. ‘being as it is’ and ‘being
as far as’.

(a. Right Manner of Perception.) Their manner [of perception] is ‘as it is’, Because they have
understood the quiescent nature of the world, And this [understanding] is caused by The
purity [of the innate mind] and Their perception of the defilement as being destroyed from
the outset. || 15 ||

Here, ‘being as it is’ should be understood thus: because, [with respect to the manner], they
(i.e. Bodhisattvas) have understood the extremity of non-substantiality of the whole world
called Individualities and Separate Elements as it is. And this understanding, relating
to the non-annihilation of Individualities and Separate Elements because of their nature
of absolute quiescence from the outset, is produced, in short, by two causes. Namely, because
of their perception of the innate brightness of the mind, and because of their perception
of being destroyed from the outset’, i.e. the extinction of defilements on the mind.Here,
these two, i.e. the innate brightness of the mind and the defilement on the mind, are
quite difficult to be understood in relation to the fact that, in the immaculate sphere, there
is no succession of a second mind because both minds, good and bad, act together as one
and the same.Therefore, it is said: “O Lord, a good mind is momentary; it cannot be afflicted
by defilements. The bad mind is [also] momentary; even this [bad] mind cannot be afflicted
by defilements. O Lord, defilements cannot touch that mind. [And the mind cannot be
touched by the Defilements]. O Lord, how is it pośible that the mind, of untouchable character,
can be afflicted by darkness? O Lord, still there is defilement and there is defiled
mind. Moreover, O Lord, the meaning that the mind purified by nature is defiled is difficult
to be understood”.Thus, with reference to [the manner of] ‘being as it is’, the explanation
of the meaning ‘difficult to be understood’ should be understood in detail according
to the Sūtra.

(b. Unlimited Extent of Perception.) Their extent [of perception] is ‘as far as’, Because they
perceive the existence Of the nature of Omniscience in all living beings, By the intellect
reaching as far as the limit of the knowable. || 16 ||Here, ‘being as far as’ should be
understood thus: because [with respect to the extent], they perceive the existence of the
Matrix of the Tathāgata in all living beings, up to those who are in the animal kingdom,
by means of the supermundane intellect which reaches as far as the limit of all knowable
things. And this perception of Bodhisattvas takes place in the first Stage of the Bodhisattva,
because [verily in that Stage], the Absolute Essence is realized in the sense of all-pervading.

(§2. Introspective Character of Bodhisattva‘s Perception.) Thus, what is called ‘understanding
in such a way’, That is the perception by one‘s own wisdom. It is pure in the Immaculate
Sphere, Because it is free from attachment and has no hindrance. || 17 ||

‘Thus, in such a way’, by this way, i.e. through ‘being as it is’ and ‘being as far as’; what
is called ‘understanding’ of the supermundane path, is here intended to be the perception
of the Saints by the supermundane wisdom of their own, i.e. uncommon to others.And this
[perception] is called perfectly pure in comparison with the superficial knowledge of everyday
life because, in brief, of two reasons. Which ones? Because it is ‘free from any attachment’,
and because it ‘has no hindrance’. Here, as its field is the innate purity of the
Essence of living beings through its being as it is, the perception [of the Saints] is free
from any attachment; and through its being as far as, its field is the unlimited number
of knowable objects, therefore, that perception has no hindrance.

(§3. Superiority of Bodhisattva’s Community) Through the purity of their perception by wisdom,
It is superior as [being the same as] Buddha’s Wisdom. Therefore, the Saints abiding in
the irreversible state Are [worthy of being] the refuge of all living beings. || 18 ||

Thus, this ‘purity of perception by wisdom’ of Bodhisattvas who mounted to the Stage of being
irreversible is to be known as ‘the supreme’, because it approached the highest purity of
the perception of Buddha‘s Wisdom; or otherwise, because it is superior to the other qualities
of Bodhisattva, donation, moral conduct, etc. On account of this purity, it is said
that Bodhisattvas in the irreversible state are worthy of being the refuge of all living
beings.There is no mention of the Jewel of Community of the Śrāvakas, immediately after the
Jewel of Community of the Bodhisattvas, because the former is not worthy of being worshipped.Indeed,
there is no wise man who, having known the distinction of qualities between Bodhisattvas
and Śrāvakas, casting off the new-moon-like Bodhisattvas, who have the lustre-disk
of Wisdom and Compassion filling with great accumulation of merits and knowledge for
the Great Enlightenment, and are standing in the illumination over the group existence of
innumerable living beings and entering the way favourable for going toward the full-moon of
the supreme Tathāgata, tries to bow before the Śravakas, who in their turn, although having
attained certain limited superficial knowledge, are standing in the illumination for their
own existence like stars.Indeed, even those Bodhisattvas who have resolved to attain
the Enlightenment for the first time by the quality based upon the purity of altruistic intention,
can overcome the holy Śrāvakas who are pitiless, indifferent to the nourishment of
others, although having attained perfect purity of immaculate moral conduct and discipline.
How much more is the case of the other qualities of Bodhisattvas, 10 Controlling Powers,
etc.? Really, it will be said:One who feeds moral conduct for his own sake, Apart from
Compassion on the living beings of bad conduct, And who is endowed with pure wealth of moral
conduct only for his own nourishment, Such a saint is never called a man of pure conduct.
One who, having aroused the highest Compassion toward others And having accepted the moral
conduct, Renders services for others’ livelihood like fire, wind, water and earth, Such
a one is a [real] moral man, and others are of sham morality.

