VIII. ANALYSIS OF THE GERM FROM 10 POINTS OF VIEW

Summary: The own nature and the cause, The result, function, union and manifestation, Various
states and all-pervadingness, The qualities always unchangeable and non-differential In
these [points of view], there should be known The implication of the Absolute Essence. ||
29 ||

In short, with reference to these 10 meanings, there should be understood the various aspects
of the Essence of the Tathāgata, which is the sphere of the highest true knowledge. What
are the meanings ? They are namely: the own nature [of the Germ]; the cause; the result [of
its purification]; the function [towards the purification]; the union [of the Germ]; the
manifestation [of the Germ]; the various states [of its manifestation]; all-pervadingness
[of the Germ]; unchangeability [of the Germ through various states]; and non-differentiation
[of the Germ with the Reality].

(I. SVABHĀVA & II. HETU) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘own nature’and ‘cause’ there
is one śloka. (Kārikā 6) [The Matrix of the Tathāgata] is always undefiled by nature, Like
the pure jewel, the sky and water; It follows after the faith in the Doctrine, The highest
Intellect, Meditation and Compassion. || 30 ||(§1. The Nature of the Essence of the Tathāgata.)
Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because of its own nature of
power, Identity, and being moist; in these [three points] [The Essence of the Tathāgata
has] a resemblance To the quality of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water. || 31 ||

‘In these’ three [points], which are already mentioned above, the resemblance of the Essence
of the Tathāgata to the purified quality of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water,
respectively, should be known with reference to its particular and common characteristics.Now,
first of all, a resemblance to the wish-fulfilling jewel is to be known of the Absolute
Body of the Tathāgata, with reference to its particular characteristic, the own nature
of powers, fulfillment of desired objects etc.A resemblance to the sky is to be known of
the Reality, with reference to its own nature of identity [everywhere] as the particular characteristic.
A resemblance to water is to be known of the Germ of the Tathāgata, with reference
to its moist nature of mercy towards living beings as the particular characteristic.And
now, of all these, with reference to their being undefiled always, absolutely, by nature,
i.e., the innate purity as the common characteristic, this very resemblance [of the
Essence] to the purified qualities of wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water is to be understood.

(§2. Obstructions and Causes of Purification). Now, what is shown by the latter half of the
śloka (v. 30)? There are four kinds of Obstructions Enmity to the Doctrine and perception
of the Self, Fear of Suffering in this world, And indifference to the profit of living beings
; || 32 ||[These are respectively] of the Icchantikas, Of the Heretics, the Śrāvakas and
the Pratyekabuddhas ; The virtues, the faith [in the Doctrine] etc., are The four Causes
of purification. || 33 ||

In brief there are those three kinds of living beings among their multitudes: 1) those who cling
to the worldly life, 2) those who seek for deliverance from it, 3) those who wish neither
of both.Of them, 1) those who cling to the worldly life should be known as twofold. a)
The people whose intention is against the path to Emancipation and who never belong to the
family of the perfect Nirvāṇa, Those are only seeking for Phenomenal Life and not for Nirvāṇa.
And b) Those people who, although belonging to this Our Religion, have definitely
fallen into the former’s way. Some of these are hostile to the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle.
With reference to them, the Lord said as follows:“I am not their teacher; they are not
my pupils. O Śāriputra, I say of them that they are chiefly filled with darkness, as migrating
from darkness to another darkness, from gloom to greater gloom”.Next, 2) ‘those who
seek for deliverance from this worldly life’ are also twofold. a) Those who have fallen into
a methodless way and b) ‘those who are in [the correct] method’. Here, ‘those who are of
no method’ are again divided into three. i) Outsiders of this Religion, i.e. various kinds
of Heretics, i.e. the Carakas, the Parivrājakas i, the Jains, etc.ii) & iii) Insiders of
Our Religion, but whose conduct is in common with the Heretics. They, though being faithful
in [Buddhism], take hold of bad conceptions. Then, what are they ? They are namely, ii)
those who have the perception of the substantial Ego and have no faith in the Highest Truth.
With reference to them, the Lord said :“One who has no faith in Non-substantiality is
not different from the Heretics”.iii) Those who have the conception of the Non-substantiality
and are proud of it are doubtless at the door of Emancipation through the Non-substantiality
in this religion. But as they are intoxicated with this Non-substantiality, it follows
for them that Non-substantiality itself becomes a [wrong] conception. With reference
to these, he (= the Lord) said [in the Scripture]: “O Kaśyapa, really even such a conception
which maintains substantial Ego as much as Mt. Sumeru is better than the conception of
Non-substantiality on the part of those who are proud of it”.Here, b ‘those who are in [the
correct] method’ are again twofold. i) Those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka and
ii) those who belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha. [Both of them] have proceeded
on the fixed way of rightfulness.And next, 3) ‘those who wish neither of both the worldly
life and deliverance from it’ are the people who are standing firmly amidst the Great Vehicle
and are of the highest, talented faculty. They are not seeking for the Phenomenal Life
as the Icchantikas do, nor are they those who are in no method like Heretics, nor those
who are in the correct method [for deliverance] like Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas,but, having
entered the Path to obtain [the intuition of] the equality of this Phenomenal Life with
Nirvāṇa, they intend not to stay fixedly in the Nirvāṇa; their activities are based upon
Phenomenal Life but without being defiled by it, and their root is perfectly pure as being
grounded in the firm Compassion and Superior IntentionAnd here, 1) those people who cling
to this wordly life, i.e. the Icchantikas and those who, though belonging to this Our Religion,
have definitely fallen into the former’s way are called (A) the group of people who
conform in the wrong way.2-a) ‘Those people who seek for deliverance from the worldly life
but have no method’ are called (B) the group of people unconformed. 2-b) ‘Those people
who seek for deliverance with the correct method’ and 3) ‘those who wish neither of both’
and have entered the path through which [the intuition of] the equality [of the Phenomenal
Life with the Nirvāṇa] is attained are called (C) the group of people who conform in the
right way.Of these [groups of living beings], keeping aside those people who stand firmly
in the Great Vehicle and follow the unobstructed way, other people are [fourfold], i.e. the
Icchantikas, the Heretics, the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas.Of these [four groups],
there are four kinds of Obstructions on account of which they cannot understand or realize
the Essence of the Tathāgata. What are then the four Obstructions? --That is to say, 1) the
enmity to the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle. This is the Obstruction of the Icchantikas,
and its Antidote is the practice of the faith in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle by the
Bodhisattvas. 2) The conception of the Self on the separate elements. This is the Obstruction
of the Heretics, and its Antidote is the practice of Supremacy in the transcendental
Intellect by the Bodhisattvas.3) The notion of Suffering [or rather] the fear of Suffering
in Phenomenal Life.This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka
and its Antidote is the practice of Meditations, Gaganagañjā etc., by the Bodhisattvas.4)
Aversion to the profit of living beings or Indifference to the profit of living beings.
This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and its
Antidote is the practice of Great Compassion. by the Boddhisattvas.These are the four kinds
of Obstructions of the four kinds of living beings. And having practised the four kinds
of Antidotes to these Obstructions, i.e. the faith [in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle]
etc., the Bodhisattvas attain the highest purity, the highest truth, i.e. the Absolute Body.
And, accompanied by these four causes of origination of purity, they become the sons
of the Religious King in the Buddha’s family. How are they? It is said:

Those whose seed is the faith in the highest Vehicle, Whose mother is the transcendental Intellect,
On account of the origination of Buddha’s Doctrine; Whose abiding womb is the bliśful
meditation And whose nurse is called Mercy; They are the sons, the after-comers of the
Buddhas. || 34 ||(III. PHALA & IV KARMAN) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘result’
and ‘function’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā 7) The Supreme Virtues of Purity, Unityś, Bliś
and Eternity; [These] are its results [of the purification]; [Towards this purification]
it has the functions, Aversion to Suffering, longing for and praying for the acquisition of
Quiescence. || 35 ||(§1. The Four Supreme Virtues as the Result of Purification.) Here,
what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because of the change of value in the Absolute
Body, The results of these [4 causes] are, in short, [The Purity, etc.] represented as
the Antidote To the four kinds of delusion. || 36 ||

Those terms, ‘the faith’. etc., have been taught as the causes of purification of the Essence
of the Tathāgata. ‘Of these [four causes]’, in brief, the four kinds of Supreme Virtues
of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata are to be understood as ‘the results’ on account of
their being Antidotes to the opposites of four kinds of delusion, respectively.Now, there
is a notion of being eternal, bliśful, of substantial Ego, of being pure regarding the separate
things consisting of form and others which are really non-eternal, full of sufferings,
of no substantial Ego and impure, respectively. Such a notion is called ‘the fourfold delusion’.Being
opposite to this notion, there should be known ‘the fourfold non-delusion’.
Which four? That is to say, the notion of being non-eternal, full of sufferings, of no substantial
Ego, and impure regarding just those separate things of form, etc. Such a notion
is called the fourfold Opposite of delusion. And again, this very [notion of non-delusion]
is implied as ‘delusion’ with reference to the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata whose characteristics
are eternal, etc.Being the Antidote of this notion, there is established the fourfold
Supreme Virtue of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. That is to say, the Supreme
Eternity, the Supreme Bliś, the Supreme Unity, and the Supreme Purity. And this subject is
to be known in detail according to the Scripture.[It runs as follows]: “O Lord, the people
have a miscomprehension regarding the phenomenal things consisting of five personality aggregates
which cling to existence so. They have a notion of eternity on the non-eternal things,
a notion of bliss regarding painful things, of substantial Ego regarding non-substantial
things, and have a notion of purity regarding impure things.Even all the Śrāvakas and
Pratyekabuddhas, O Lord, also have a miscomprehension in regard to the Absolute Body of
the Tathāgata which is the sphere of the Wisdom of Omniscience and has never been seen before
just because of their knowledge of Non-substantiality.O Lord, if there would be the people
who have the notion of Eternity, Unity, Bliś, and Purity [regarding the Absolute Body],
they would he the legal sons of the Buddhas and be of no miscomprehension. O Lord, [verily]
they would be of perfect perception. For what reason?[Because], O Lord, the Absolute
Body of the Tathāgata is verily the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliś, the Supreme Unity
and the Supreme Purity. O Lord, those people who perceive the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata
in this way, perceive perfectly. Those who perceive perfectly are, O Lord, the legal sons
of the Buddhas” &c.

(§2. Concordance between Supreme Virtues and Causes of Purification.) And again, of these four
Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, one should know the reversed arrangement
according to the order of causes. Here, 1) being opposite to the taking of delight
in the ‘impure’ Phenomenal Life by the Icchantikas who have hatred against the Doctrine
of Great Vehicle, it should be understood that the acquisition of the Supreme Purity is the
result of ‘Practice of the Faith in the Doctrine of Great Vehicle’ by the Bodhisattvas.2)
Being opposite to the taking of delight in the perception of unreal Ego by the Heretics
who perceive an Ego in the individual things consisting of five personality aggregates, it
should be understood that the acquisition of the Supreme Unity is the result of ‘practice
of supremacy in the transcendental Intellect’.Indeed, all the other Heretics consider the
things consisting of form, etc. as the Ego though they are of the unreal nature. And this
very thing as has been perceived by the Heretics does not correspond with the [real] characteristic
of Ego, hence it is always non-Ego.On the contrary, the Tathāgata has attained
the highest supremacy, [knowing] non-substantiality of all the phenomena by means of his Wisdom
perceiving the truth. And this very non-substantiality as has been perceived by the
Tathāgata is quite consistent with the characteristic of non-ego, hence there is always the
implication of Ego, by taking non-Egoity in the meaning of Ego, as has been said: “He stands
by application of no standing place”.

3) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the cessation of Sufferings of the Phenomenal
Life alone by those who belong to the Vehicle Śrāvaka and who have fear of the sufferings
of Phenomenal Life, it should be understood that the result of the practice of various kinds
of meditation, named Gaganagañjā, etc. is the acquisition of the Supreme Bliss concerned
with all matters, mundane and supermundane.4) Being opposite to the taking of delight in
the isolated abode by those who belong to the Vehicle of Pratyekabuddha and who are indifferent
to the benefits of living beings, it should be understood that the Bodhisattvas practice
of Great Compassion has the acquisition of the Supreme Eternity as its result, because
practising [for the sake of others] as long as the world exists, without interruption,
their attachment to the benefits for living beings is perfectly pure.Thus, kinds of Supreme
Virtues named Purity, Unity, Bliss and Eternity are brought about on the Absolute Body of
the Tathāgata as the result of Bodhisattvas’ kinds of practices, namely, those of Faith
[in the Doctrine of Great Vehicle], the Supremacy in the transcendental Intellect, the Meditations
and the Great Compassion, respectively.And because of these four [Supreme Virtues
in the Absolute Body] it is said, the Tathāgata is the highest Absolute Essence, he reaches
up to the limit of the space and he lasts as long as the utmost limit [of the world].Indeed,
the Tathāgata, through the practice of faith in the highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle,
has attained the highest state of the Absolute Essence which is the ultimate purity,
hence he has become the highest Absolute Essence.Through the practice of the supremacy in
the transcendental Intellect, [the Tathāgata] has realized perfectly the non-substantiality
of living beings and of the material world, just as the sky [reaches up to the limit of
the world] and, through the practice of various kinds of meditations named Gaganagañjā,
etc. he has perfectly perceived the omnipresence of the power of the highest truth everywhere.
Because of these two acquisitions, he reaches up to the limit of space.[And lastly],
through the practice of the Great Compassion, [he has] mercy towards all living beings beyond
the limitation of time. Therefore, with reference to this point, it is said he lasts as
long as the utmost limit [of the world].

(§3. Impediments to the Attainment of the Supreme Virtues.) And now, for the acquisition of
these four kinds of Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, there are four
Impediments even in case of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have obtained
[10] Controlling Powers, though they are abiding in the Immaculate Sphere.That is to
say, 1) ‘phenomenon of condition’; 2) ‘phenomenon of cause’; 3) ‘phenomenon of origination’;
and ‘phenomenon of destruction’. Here, ‘Phenomenon of condition’ means the Dwelling-place
of Ignorance. [It is the condition of birth of the Body made of mind for the Saints]
just as Ignorance is [the condition] of Predispositions [for ordinary people].2) ‘Phenomenon
of cause’ means the Immaculate Action conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance [as
the cause of the Body made of mind], [and it is to be] compared with the Predispositions
[of ordinary people].3) ‘Phenomenon of origination’ means the origination of the 3-fold Body
made of mind, conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance and caused by the Immaculate
Action, just as the origination of the Three-Worlds is conditioned by kinds of Graspings
and caused by the Passioned Actions.‘Phenomenon of destruction’ means Death as the inconceivable
Transformation conditioned by the origination of the 3-fold Body made of mind. It
corresponds to the Decrepitude and Death conditioned by the Birth [in the Three-Worlds].

Now, the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have attained Controlling Powers,
have not extirpated the Dwelling-place of Ignorance which is the ground of all the subsequent
Defilements, hence they cannot attain the Supreme Purity as the end of removal of all
the dusts of defilements with their bad-smelling impressions.And, on account of that Dwelling-place
of Ignorance, and because of their being accompanied with the arising of the subtle-featured
dualistic views, they cannot attain ultimately the Supreme Unity which is characterized
as no accumulation of Active Force.And, on account of that Dwelling-place of
Ignorance and Immaculate Action caused by the arising of the subtle-featured dualistic view
conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance, there is [still] the arising of the Mind-made
aggregate. Therefore, they cannot attain the ultimate Supreme Bliss as the extinction
of this Spiritual Aggregate.And [lastly], unless they realize the Essence of the Tathāgata
as being arisen from the entire extinction of all impurities in forms of Defilements, Actions
and Originations, they cannot remove Death as the Inconceivable Transformation. Consequently,
they cannot attain the absolutely unchangeable Supreme Eternity.Here, the Dwelling-place
of Ignorance is to be compared with the Impurity of Defilements [in the case of
ordinary people]. The performance of Immaculate Action corresponds to the Impurity of Actions.
[And] the 3-fold origination of the Body made of mind and Death as the Inconceivable
Transformation corresponds to the Impurity of Origination. And this passage is to be understood
in detail according to the Scriprure. [It runs as follows]:“Lord, just as, being conditioned
by [4] graspings and caused by passionate actions, there are produced the three spheres
of existence; likewise, Lord, being conditioned by the dwelling-place of ignorance
and caused by the immaculate actions, there are born the kinds of body made of mind of the
Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have attained the [10] Controlling Powers.[Thus]
O Lord, for the birth of the 3-fold Body made of mind in these lands and for the
origination of the immaculate actions the dwelling-place of Ignorance is the [inevitable]
condition, & c.”.Thus, in these Bodies made of mind of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas,
there are no Supreme Virtues of Purity, Unity, Bliss and Eternity. Therefore,
it is said: “Only the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme
Bliś, the Supreme Unity and the Supreme Purity”.

(§4. The Motives of the Supreme Virtues) Verily, the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is pure
Because of his innate purity and removal of Impressions; He is the highest Unity because he
is quiescent, Having destroyed the dualistic view of Ego and non-Ego. || 37 ||He is bliśful
because the Mind-made Aggregate And its causes have been removed [completely]; He is eternal
because he has realized The equality of the Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa. || 38 ||

In short, by two reasons there should be known the Supreme Purity in the Absolute Body of the
Tathāgata. That is to say, 1) through his being perfectly pure by nature, as the common
feature; and 2) through his being perfectly pure by the removal of pollution, as the special
feature [to the Buddha].The Supreme Unity, too, should be understood by two reasons: 1)
because of the removal of false imagination of Ego by rejecting the extremity peculiar to
the Heretics, and 2) because of the removal of false imagination concerning non-substantiality
by rejecting the extremity peculiar to the Śrāvakas.The Supreme Bliss is to be known
likewise by two reasons: 1) because of the abandonment of the origination of all sufferings
as well as the extirpation of succeeding origination of Impressions; and 2) because of
the realization of all sufferings as well as the realization of extinction of the Mind-made
Aggregates.[And finally] by two reasons the Supreme Eternity is to be known: 1) Because
he does not fall into the Nihilistic Extremity through his not diminishing, neglecting the
non-eternal Phenomenal Life; 2) nor does he fall into the Eternalistic Extremity through
his not intensifying the eternal Nirvāṇa.It is said as follows: “If someone would perceive
that all the Phenomenal Worlds are non-eternal, O Lord, this view would be a Nihilistic Perception.
It would never be the true perception at all. If someone would perceive that the
Nirvāṇa is eternal, O Lord, this view would be an Eternalistic Perception. And it would
never be the True Perception at all”.(§4. The Unstable Nirvāṇa.) Therefore, by this introduction
to the theory s of the Absolute Essence, it is said from the highest viewpoint that
the Phenomenal Life itself is Nirvāṇa, because [the Bodhisattvas] realize the Unstable Nirvāṇa,
being indiscriminative of both [the Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa].

Moreover, they are neither entirely involved among all living beings nor remote from them, for
two reasons. Here, therefore, the explanation will be made merely about how to attain this
Unstable stability. Then, for which two reasons?Here, in this world, the Bodhisattva is
not entirely involved among all living beings because he has completely rejected all tendencies
of desires by means of the Transcendental Intellect. [At the same time], he is not
remote from them since he never abandons them owing to his Great Compassion.This is the means
for the acquisition of the Supreme Enlightenment of which the Unstability is the Essential
nature. By means of the Intellect, indeed, the Bodhisattva has exterminated without
remainder the tendency of desire, hence, being deeply intent towards the Nirvāṇa for his own
sake, he does not stay in the Phenomenal Life as the lineage of no Nirvāṇa.[At the same
time], owing to his Great Compassion, he never abandons those suffering people, hence, having
activity in this Phenomenal Life, for the sake of others, he does not abide in the Nirvāṇa,
as do those who seek only for Quiescence. Thus these two qualities i.e. the Intellect
and Great Compassion are the root, i.e. the foundation of the Highest Enlightenment. [So
it is said]:

[Though] Having destroyed affection for himself By means of the Intellect, completely, The Saint,
being full of Mercy, does not approach Quiescence because of his affection for the people;
Thus standing on both the Intellect and Mercy, These two means of Enlightenment, The
Saint approaches neither this world nor Nirvāṇa. || 39 ||

(§5. The Functions of the Germ for its Purification IV.) Now, with reference to the subject
of ‘function’ which is previously maintained in verse, what is shown by the latter half of
that śloka? If there is no Essence of the Buddha, There will be no aversion to Suffering,
Nor will there be desire, nor earnest wish, Nor prayer for Nirvāṇa. || 40 ||

So it is said: “O Lord, if there were no Matrix of the Tathāgata, then there would arise neither
aversion to Suffering nor desire for Nirvāṇa, nor earnest wish for it or prayer for it”.Here,
in brief, the Essence of the Buddha, the perfectly pure Germ, even of those people
who are fixed in the wrong way has the two kinds of foundation of its actions.That is to
say, it produces disgust with Phenomenal Life basing itself upon the perception of the fault
of Suffering, and it calls forth longing, desire, earnest wish and prayer for the Nirvāṇa,
basing itself upon the perception that happiness is the merit.Here, ‘longing’ means ‘expectation’.
‘Desire‘ means ‘uncowardliness’ for the attainment of the intended object. ‘Earnest
Wish’ means ‘searching for’ the means to attain the intended object. ‘Prayer’ means
`will’ or ‘manifestation of the mind’.

The perception of Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa, The former is full of Suffering; hence it is
the fault, The latter is of bliś; therefore it is the merit; It exists only in case the Germ
of the Buddha exists, And does not exist with people of no Germ. || 41 ||

The perception that Phenomenal Life is full of suffering, hence is the fault, and that Nirvāṇa
is blissful, hence it is the merit, this perception belongs to those people who are possessed
of good virtues and exists only in case the Germ [of the Tathāgata] exists. Thus this
perception does not take place without causes or without conditions.Indeed, if it were
without Germ, without causes and conditions and were not brought about through the extirpation
of sin, it would exist even with the Icchantikas who are of the lineage of no Nirvāṇa.Really,
it cannot take place unless they bring about the Germ which is purified from accidental
pollutions and the faith in any one of three Vehicles through being endowed with the
kinds of good actions, beginning with having contact with a personage of high virtue.(The
saying: the Icchantikas are of no Nirvāṇa, is only conventional.) It is however said [in
the Scripture]: “After this the rays of the disk of the sun-like Tathāgata fall upon the
bodies of even those people who are fixed in the wrong way and make benefits for them. And
furthermore producing the cause of future [bliś] [in them], they cause them to thrive with
virtuous qualities”.And also the saying: “the Icchantikas are by all means of the nature
of no Perfect Nirvāṇa” is taught in order to remove the hatred against the Doctrine of the
Great Vehicle, this being the cause of their being Icchantikas and refers to a certain period
of time.Indeed, as there exists the Germ which is pure by nature, none could be of the
absolutely impure nature. Therefore, with reference to the fact that all living beings,
with no difference, have the pośibility of being purified, the Lord has said again:“Though
being beginningless, indeed, [The Phenomenal Life] has its end; Being pure by nature, It
is endowed with Eternity; Being covered from outside By the beginningless sheath [of defilements],
[This nature] is however invisible, Just as gold concealed [in sand and dust]”.

(V. YOGA) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘Union’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā 8) Being
the inexhaustible storage of jewels of immeasurable virtues, [The Germ of the Buddha is]
like the Ocean; It is akin to the lantern, because of its nature of Being endowed with properties
indivisible [from it]. || 42 ||(§1. The Union of the Germ with the Factors of its
Purification.) Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because it consists
of the sources of the Absolute Body, Of the Buddha’s Wisdom and Compassion, There is shown
the similarity of the Germ with the ocean, Through being receptacle, jewels and water. ||
43 ||

On account of three points, the Essence of the Tathāgata has a resemblance to the great ocean
in three ways, respectively, and through this similarity, the subject ‘Union’ should be
understood in the sense that the Essence of the Tathāgata is provided with causes [of its
purification].Then, which are the three points? They are namely: [its being provided with]
1) the cause of purification of the Absolute Body; 2) the cause of the attainment of Buddha’s
Wisdom; 3) and the cause of the manifestation of Buddha’s Great Compassion.Here, 1) ‘the
cause of purification of the Absolute Body’ is to be known as the practice of faith in
[the Doctrine of] the Great Vehicle; 2) ‘the cause of the attainment of Buddha’s Wisdom’,
the practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation; 3) and ‘the cause
of the manifestation of Buddha’s Great Compassion’, the practice of Bodhisattva’s Great
Compassion.Here, the practice of faith in [the Doctrine] of the Great Vehicle has a similarity
to the ‘receptacle’ because, in this [receptacle], there is an accumulation of the jewel
of Intellect and Meditation as well as the water of Compassion which are immeasurable
and inexhaustible.The practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation
has a similarity to ‘jewel’ because of its being indiscriminative and being endowed with
inconceivable and powerful virtues.The practice of Bodhisattva’s Compassion has a similarity
to ‘water’ because, in all the world, it manifests the highest moisture with the feature
of one and the same taste. This coherence i.e. the accompaniment of these three things
the Absolute Body and others, with these three causes, the practice of faith, etc., is here
called ‘Union’.

(§2. The Union of the Germ with the Result of Purification.) Now, what is shown by the latter
half of the śloka? In the immaculate basis, the supernatural faculties, The Wisdom and Immaculateness
are inseparable from Reality; Therefore, they have a resemblance to a lantern,
On account of its light, heat and colour. || 44 ||

The subject, ‘Union’ is here to be understood in the sense that the Essence of the Tathāgata
is accompanied by the results [of its purification], through its similarity to a lantern
in three ways on account of three points, respectively.Then, which are the three points? Namely,
[the Essence of the Buddha is endowed with] 1) the Supernatural Faculties; 2) the Wisdom
by which the evil influence is destroyed; 3) and the Extinction of Evil Influence. Here,
the Supernatural faculties have a resemblance to ‘light of flame’ because they have a
characteristic of engaging in the extinction of darkness which is opposite to the knowledge
which perceives an object.The Wisdom by which the Evil Influence is destroyed is similar
to ‘heat’ because of its characteristic of engaging in consuming the fuel of the Active
force and Defilements, leaving no residue. The Extinction of Evil Influence as the [result
of] the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis has resemblance to ‘colour’ because of its characteristic
of being perfectly stainless, pure and radiant.Here, it is ‘stainless’ because
it has destroyed the Obstruction caused by moral Defilements. It is ‘pure’ because it has
destroyed the Obstruction on account of knowable things. It is ‘radiant’ [by nature] because
these two [Obstructions] are merely of an occasional nature.Thus, in brief, the properties
of those people who have nothing further to learn summarized in these seven, i.e. the
Supernatural Faculties, the Wisdom destroying the Evil Influence and the Destruction [of
Evil Influence], are in the Immaculate Sphere, inseparable from each other, not different
[from each other] and coherent with the Absolute. This point is here called ‘Union’.And with
reference to this subject of ‘Union’, the example of a lantern is to be understood in detail
according to the sūtra. “O Śāriputra, just as a lantern is of indivisible nature and
its qualities are inseparable from it. That is to say, [it is] indivisible [inseparable],
from light, heat and color. The precious stone is also [indivisible, inseparable], from its
light, color and shape.In the same way, Śāriputra, the Absolute Body, taught by the Tathāgata
is of indivisible nature, of the qualities inseparable from Wisdom (i.e. Enlightenment).
That is to say, [indivisible, inseparable], from the Properties of the Tathāgata which
are far beyond the sand of the Ganga in number”.

(VI. VṚTTI) Now, with reference to the meaning of’manifestation’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā)
The Ordinary People, the Saints, and the Buddhas, They are indivisible from Reality, Therefore,
the Matrix of the Buddha exists among [all] living beings; Thus it is taught by the
perceivers of the Reality. || 45 ||What is shown by this śloka? The Ordinary People are
of erroneous conception, Being opposite to them, [the Saints are] the perceivers of the truth,
And being of the perfectly right conception, The Buddhas are apart from the dualistic
view. || 46 ||

In connection with the introductory teaching of the Non-discriminative Wisdom, it has been taught,
in the Prajñāparamitā, etc., for the Bodhisattvas that the Essence of the Tathāgata
has the general characteristic of being Reality, the perfect purity, i.e. the Suchness of
all the elements. On the basis of this general characteristic, it should be known in brief,
there are threefold different manifestations of three kinds of people:...of the Ordinary
People who do not perceive the Truth, of the Saints who perceive the Truth and of the Tathāgata
who has attained the ultimate purity.In other words, they are ‘of the erroneous conception’,
‘of the right conception’, and ‘of the perfectly right conception and of no dualistic
view’, respectively. Here, ‘of the erroneous conception’ is because Ordinary People
have delusion on account of their conception, mind and perception. ‘Of the right conception’
is because the Saints, being opposite to them, have destroyed the delusion. [And lastly],
‘of the perfectly right conception and of no dualistic view’ is because the Perfectly
Enlightened Ones have dispelled the Obstructions of moral defilement and of knowable things
along with their Impressions.(VII. AVASTHĀPRABHEDA) Hereafter, with reference to this subject
of ‘manifestation’, other four subjects should be understood through the detailed explanation
[on each subject]. Here, [first of all], with reference to the subject, ‘different
states’ among these three kinds of people, there is one śloka.

(Kārikā) Impure, [partly] pure and [partly] impure, And perfectly pure these are said of The
Ordinary beings, the Bodhisattvas, And the Tathāgata, respectively. || 47 ||What is shown
by this śloka? The Essence [of the Buddha], [hitherto briefly explained] By these six subjects,
beginning with ‘own nature’, Is, in accordance with its states, Designated by different
names. || 48 ||

Any teaching referring to the immaculate Essence [of the Buddha], taught by the Lord in detail
through various divisions of Scripture is hitherto briefly summarized by six subjects,
namely, ‘own nature’, ‘cause’ [of purification], ‘result’ [of purification], ‘function’ [towards
purification], ‘union’ [with the cause and result], and ‘manifestation’. This very
Essence of the Buddha is here to be known as being taught through the teaching of different
names in accordance with its states, respectively.That is to say, 1) in the ‘impure’ state
[the Essence of the Buddha is named] ‘the Ordinary Beings’; 2) in the ‘[partly] pure and
[partly] impure’ state, the Bodhisattva; 3) and in the‘perfectly pure’, the Tathāgata. It
has been said by the Lord: “Śāriputra, this Absolute Body, when it is covered with the limitless
sheath of defilements, being carried by the stream of the Phenomenal Life and moving
to and fro between death and birth in the course of the beginningless Phenomenal Life,
is called ‘the [ordinary] living beings’.This same Absolute Body, O Śāriputra, when it has
become averse to the Suffering in the stream of Phenomenal Life and become free from all
the objects of desire, doing the practice towards Enlightenment by means of the 10 Supreme
Virtues as including and representing all of the 84 thousand groups of Doctrines, it is
called ‘the Bodhisattva’.Furthermore, O Śāriputra, this very Absolute Body, when, having been
perfectly released from all the sheaths of defilements, having surpaśed all the Sufferings,
having rejected all stains of subsequent defilements, it has become pure, perfectly
pure, and, abiding in the Absolute Essence which is the highest point of purity, ascending
to the stage to be looked upon by all living beings, has attained the unexcelled, manly strength
among all knowable spheres, and has attained the Controlling Power on all separate
elements, which is of no obstruction and of no hindrance, then it is called the Tathāgata,
the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One”.

(VIII. SARVATRAGA) The Essence of the Tathāgata is ‘all-pervading’ in these three states. With
reference to this meaning, there is one śloka. (Kārikā) Just as being of indiscriminative
nature, Space pervades everywhere, Similarly all-pervading is the Essence, The immaculate
nature of the mind. || 49 ||What is shown by this śloka? It pervades with common feature
The defective, the virtuous and the ultimate, Just as space occupies all the visible forms,
Either inferior, middle, or superior. || 50 ||

That which is the indiscriminative Innate Mind of the ordinary people, of the Saints and of
the Buddhas has a common feature in these three states, irrespective of their being defective,
virtuous or the ultimate point of pure virtue. Therefore, just as space penetrates all
the receptacles regardless of material, whether clay, silver or gold, it is all-pervading,
all-embracing, equal, of no difference and is present always.For this reason, it has been
said in the same scripture, immediately after the explanation of different states: “Therefore,
O Śāriputra, the [ordinary] living beings and the Absolute Body are not different
from each other. The living beings are nothing but the Absolute Body, and the Absolute Body
is nothing but the living beings. These two are non-dual by meaning, and different merely
by letters”.(IX. AVIKĀRA) Now, the Essence of the Tathāgata, being all-pervading in these
three states, is, moreover, unchangeable either by Impurity or through purification. With
reference to this subject, there are 14 ślokas. [Prior to the explanation of these ślokas],
the summarized meaning of these ślokas is to be known by the following verse:

Being possessed of faults by occasion, It is, however, endowed with virtues by nature; Therefore
it is of unchangeable character In the beginning as well as afterwards. || 51 ||

In the impure state as well as in the pure and impure state, which are shown by the [first]
12 ślokas and by the [next] one śloka, respectively, [the Essence of the Tathāgata] is possessed
of faults caused by fundamental and subsequent defilements ‘by occasion’. [On the contrary],
in the perfectly pure state, shown by the 14th śloka, it is ‘Essentially’ endowed
with the Buddha’s virtues which are indivisible [from the Absolute Body], inseparable from
Wisdom, inconceivable and far greater in number than the sands of Ganga. Therefore it is
explained that the Essence of the Tathāgata, like space, is of absolutely unchangeable character
throughout different states.(A. Unchangeability in the Impure State) First of all,
with reference to the subject of ‘unchangeability’ [of the Essence of the Tathāgata] in
the Impure State, what is said in 12 ślokas ? (Kārikās 12-23) Just as space, being all-pervading,
Cannot be polluted because of its subtle nature; Similarly, abiding everywhere among
living beings, This [Essence] remains unpolluted [by defilements]. || 52 ||

Just as the worlds have everywhere Their origination and destruction in space; Similarly, on
the basis of the Innate Essence The sense-organs appear and disappear || 53 ||Just as space
has never been burnt By the fire [at the end of the world]; Likewise the fires of death,
of illness and decrepitude Cannot consume this [Essence of the Buddha]. || 54 ||The earth
is supported by water, Water by air, and air by space; Space has, however, no support Neither
in air, nor in water, nor in the earth. || 55 ||Similarly all the component elements
[of Phenomenal Life] Have their foundation in the Active Force and Defilements, And the Active
Force and Defilements exist always On the basis of the Irrational Thought. || 56 ||The
Irrational Thought is founded In the [innate] mind which is pure, The innate mind has,
however, no support In any [of the worldly] phenomena. || 57 ||All the component elements
of Phenomenal Life Are known as akin to the earth, And the Active Force and Defilements of
living beings Are known as akin to water. || 58 ||The Irrational Thought is known As having
resemblance to air; Being of no root and of no support, The Innate Mind is like space.
|| 59 ||Abiding in the Innate Mind, There occurs the irrational action of mind By the Irrational
Action of mind, The Active Force and Defilements are produced. || 60 ||All the component
elements of Phenomenal Life, Originated from the waterlike Active Force and Defilements,
Show their appearance and disappearance [repeatedly], Just as [the world repeats its]
evolution and devolution a. || 61 ||The Innate Mind is like space, Being of no cause or condition,
Or complex [of producing factors], It has neither origination nor destruction, Nor
even stability [between two points]. || 62 ||The innate nature of the mind is brilliant
And, like space, has no transformation at all; It bears, however, the impurity by stains
of desires, etc. Which are of accident and produced by wrong conception. || 63 ||

(§1. Unoriginated Character of the Innate Mind.) By this analogy of space, how is the unchangeable
character of the Essence of the Tathāgata in the impure state explained? It is said
as follows :

The accumulation of water-like Active Force and Defilements Cannot produce this space-like [Innate
Mind], And even the growing fires of death, of illness and old age Cannot consume [this
Innate Mind]. || 64 ||

The origination of the world claśified into [5] elementary groups, [18] component elements or
[12] bases of cognition is conditioned by the accumulation of water-like Active Force and
Defilements, which is, in its turn, based upon wind-circle of Irrational Thought. But this
origination of the world never causes the evolution of the Innate Mind which has a resemblance
to space.In the same way, a group of fires of death, of illness and decrepitude arises
in order to destroy the world claśified into five elementary groups, component elements
or bases of cognition which is founded on the accumulation of air-like Irrational Thought
and water-like Active Force and Defilements. But even by this arising of the fires of death,
etc., it should he known that the Innate Mind cannot be destroyed.Thus, in the impure
state, though all the Impurity of Defilements, of Active Force and Birth show their appearance
and disappearance like the material world’s, the Innate Essence of the Tathāgata is,
like space, of no origination and destruction. Therefore, it is explained as being absolutely
of unchangeable character.And this example of space which refers to the introduction
to the light of doctrine on the Innate Purity [of the mind] is to be understood in detail
according to the Scripture“O Honorable Men, Defilements are the darkness, the Pure [Mind]
is the light. Defilements are of weak power but the correct intuition is powerful. Defilements
are merely accidental, but the Innate Mind is of a pure root. Defilements are of wrong
discrimination, but the Innate Mind is indiscriminative.For example, O Honorable Men, this
great earth has its foundation in water. Water is supported by air, and air is founded
on space. But space, in its turn, has no foundation. Thus, among these four gross elements,
space is more powerful than any of the other three elements, earth, water or air. It is
also firm, immovable, neither increasing nor diminishing, neither originated nor destroyed
and is stable with its own Essence.[On the contrary], these three gross elements [other
than space] are possessed of origination and destruction, unstable and of no long duration.
It will be perceived that these three gross elements are changeable, but space is by no
means changeable.“In a similar manner, all the component elements [of the Phenomenal Life
claśified into] elementary groups, 18 component elements, or 12 bases of cognition have their
support in the Active Force and Defilements. The Active Force and Defilements are founded
on the Irrational Thought and the latter has its support in the Innate Pure Mind. Therefore,
it is said: the Mind is radiant by nature, [but it] is polluted by the occasional defilements”.After
this passage, it is continued as follows: Now, all these phenomena, the
Irrational Thought, the Active Force and Defilements, and all of the component elements of
the Phenomenal Life are originated by the complex of their causes and conditions. When these
causes and conditions lose their complexity they are immediately extinguished. On the
contrary, the Innate Mind is of no cause nor condition. Consequently, it has no complex [of
cause and condition] and hence there is neither origination nor destruction of it.Here,
the Innate Mind is like space, the Irrational Thought is like air, the Active Force and Defilements
are like water and all of the component elements of the Phenomenal Life are akin
to earth. Therefore, it is said: “all phenomena are completely devoid of any root and based
upon an unreal and unstable foundation, [because they are of unreal nature, but at the
same time] they are founded on a pure [Essence] which is, in its turn, of no root”.

(2§ Indestructible Character of the Innate Mind.) We have already explained that in the impure
state the Innate Mind has a resemblance to space on account of its ‘unchangeable’ characteristic;
the Irrational Thought and the Active Force and Defilements, being founded on the
Innate Mind, have a resemblance to air and water, respectively, on account of their characteristic
of ‘cause’, and [lastly] all of the Component Elements of Phenomenal Life, being
produced from the former two, have a resemblance to the earth on account of their characteristic
of ‘fruit’.We have not, however, discussed the similarity of the fires of death,
illness and decrepitude to the gross element of fire as being the cause of the annihilation
of Life and on account of their characteristic of being’infection’. So, on this point it
is said as follows:

The three fires, the fire at the end of the world, The fire of hell and the ordinary fire, These
are to be known respectively as the analog yFor three fires, that of death, of sickness
and old age. || 65 ||

The similarity of death, illness and old age to fire should be known for three reasons, respectively.
[Which are the three reasons ? They are namely]: because [death] leads the [internal]
bases of cognition to destruction ; 2) [illness] makes sufferings of various kinds of
torments ; and 3) [old age] leads the Active Forces to their ripening.Even by these fires,
the Essence of the Tathāgata in its impure state cannot be changed at all. With reference
to this point, it is said [in the Scripture]: “Lord, something is dead, something is born,
such sayings are merely a worldly usage. The saying ‘something is dead’, Lord, this means
the destruction of sense organs. Something is born means, Lord, origination of new sense
organs.However, Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is never born, never decays, never deceases,
never paśes away or arises [again]. For what reasons? Because, O Lord, the Matrix
of the Tathāgata, being beyond the sphere characterized as being caused and conditioned, is
eternal, constant, quiescent and everlasting”.

(B. Unchangeability in the Pure and Impure State) Now there comes one śloka referring to the
meaning of ‘unchangeability’ in the pure and impure state [of Bodhisattvas]. (Kārikā 24)
Having truly realized the Innate Mind As being released from birth and death As well as from
illness and decrepitude, The Bodhisattvas have no calamity of birth and so forth; Still,
because of the rising of Compassion towards the world, They assume the cause of calamities.
|| 66 ||(§1. The Pure Character and Impure Character of the Bodhisattva.) What is shown
by this śloka? The sufferings of death, illness and decrepitude Are destroyed by the Saints
to the root; There is a birth by the power of Active Force and Defilements; As there is
no birth [of such a kind] The saints have no root [of defilements]. || 67 ||

Now, in the impure state, the causa materialis of the fires of sufferings like death, illness
and decrepitude is the Birth based upon the Irrational Thought, the Active Force and Defilements,
just as the fuel [is the causa materialis of ordinary fires]. In the pure and impure
state, however, there is no appearance whatever of such a cause that we can know of;
there is also no flame of fires of suffering at all in the Bodhisattvas who have attained
the Body made of mind.

They, being full of mercy, make appearance Of birth, death, decrepitude and illness, Though
they have got rid of birth, etc. Because of their perception of the truth. || 68 ||

Indeed, because of their contact with the virtuous root Bodhisattvas attach themselves to the
Phenomenal World consisting of three spheres, basing themselves uponl the power of origination
by their Will. Also they make appearance of birth, of old age, of illness and of death.Still,
there are in reality no such phenomena of birth, etc. among them. Because, of course,
they have truly perceived that the Essence [of the Buddha] is of no birth and of no
origination. (References to the scriptures)(§2. Defilements endowed with Virtuous Root.)
And this state of Bodhisattvas is to be understood in detail according to the Scripture. It
is said :“Which are the Defilements endowed with virtuous root that cause [Bodhisattvas]
to reside in the Phenomenal World? They are namely: Non-satisfaction in searching for the
accumulation of merits; Acceptance of existence through origination by their own will;The
earnest wish to meet with the Buddhas; Unweariness towards the perfect maturity of living
beings. Efforts for the perfect apprehension of the sublime Doctrine ; Endeavour after works
to be done for the living beings; Non-abandonment of propensity of desire for phenomena;
Non reluctance from fetters of the Highest Virtues.O Sāgaramati, thus are the Defilements
endowed with the virtuous roots by which the Bodhisattvas attach themselves [to this world],
but they are never affected by the fault of Defilements....Then [Sagaramati] asked:
Why then, O Lord, are the virtuous roots called’Defilements’?... [The Lord] answered: Because,
O Sagaramati, by these Defilements of such kinds Bodhisattvas attach themselves to the
Phenomenal World. And this Phenomenal World is of origination from Defilements.There, to
this very Phenomenal World, Bodhisattvas attach themselves at their own wishes by their skill
of means and through producing the power of virtuous roots. Therefore, it is called `Defilements
endowed with the roots of virtuous qualities. [It is called so] inasmuch as they
attach themselves to the Phenomenal World, but not because of [actual] defilements on the
mind”.

(§3. Bodhisattvas’ Compassion.) The parable of a Householder. “For example, O Sagaramati, suppose
there were an only son of some distinguished person or householder. Suppose he were
beloved, handsome, affectionate quite agreeable in his appearance. Now suppose this boy, being
a child, would fall into a pit of night-soil while playing. Thereupon the mother and
relatives of this boy would see him fall into the impure pit.Upon seeing this they would deeply
sigh, lament and would cry out. They could not, however, take the boy out by entering
into the pit. After that the boy’s father would come to that place, and would see his only
son fallen in the pit of night-soil. Upon seeing that sight, he being affected by the intention
to pull out his only son, would hurry to enter the pit with full speed without any
feeling of disgust, and would take out his only son.O Sagaramati, this example was made
in order to make known a special meaning. Which relation should be known [between illustrations
and illustrated meaning]? O Sagamarati, ‘a pit of night-soil’ is a name for the Phenomenal
Life.‘An only son’ is a name for the living beings, because Bodhisattvas have a notion
of the only son towards all living beings.‘Mother and relatives’ is a name for those people
who belong to the Vehicles of Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha, since they, having seen the
living beings fallen into the world of transmigration, are distreśed and lament, but have
no capacity to rescue [the living beings].‘The distinguished person or the householder’
is a name for the Bodhisattva who is pure, unpolluted, of unpolluted mind, has attained the
direct perception of the immutable Absolute, but still, in order to bring living beings
to the maturity, connects himself to the Phenomenal World by his own will.O Sagaramati, such
is the Great Compassion of the Bodhisattva that, being perfectly free from all bondage,
he again assumes the origination into Existence. Being possessed of the skill of means and
the Transcendental Intellect, he is never affected by impurities; and, in order to extirpate
all the bondage of Defilements from the living beings, he preaches the Doctrine”.By this
explanation of words in the Scripture, there is explained the pure and impure state of
Bodhisattvas who have the Controlling Power through two points: [namely] the Bodhisattva
attaches himself at his will to the origination in the world, for the sake of others, by the
powers of virtuous roots and Compassion, but, at the same time, he is not polluted by the
world owing to the powers of means and the Intellect.

(§4. Bodhisattva’s Perception on the Pure Mind.) Now, when a Bodhisattva has attained the correct
perception of the Essence of the Tathāgata as being of no birth, no origination, then
he can obtain this Essential quality as a Bodhisattva. This point should be understood in
detail according to the [same] Scripture.It is said:“O Sagaramati, perceive that separate
elements are of no real Essence, of no creator, of no substance, nonexistence, lifeless,
of no personality and of no owner ! Indeed, these elements are illusorily created according
to desire. As being illusorily created, they cannot cause [one] to think or to imagine.Believing
in the fact that separate elements are created illusorily, O Sagaramati, the Bodhisattva
does never produce the feeling of disgust for any phenomenon. He will be possessed
of the pure and immaculate perception based upon the Wisdom that there is nothing which
causes benefit or harm. Thus, he knows correctly the Essential nature of separate elements.
And thus he does never cast off the armor of the Great Compassion.For example, O Sagaramati,
suppose there were an invaluable Vaidurya stone, well polished, well purified, well cleaned.
Suppose it might be thrown into mud and would remain there for a thousand years. After
the paśing of a thousand years [in mud], this stone would be drawn out from mud and would
be washed and cleaned. As being washed well, perfectly cleaned and polished, it would
never abandon its nature of jewel, pure and immaculate.In the same way, O Sagaramati, the
Bodhisattva knows the innate radiant nature of the mind of living beings. He perceives also
that the same mind is defiled by the accidental defilements. Then the Bodhisattva thinks
as follows:... These defilements would never penetrate into the radiant Innate Mind of the
living beings. Being accidental, these defilements are the production of unreal, wrong
discrimination.I can teach the Doctrine for the sake of these living beings in order to remove
their accidenta defilements. Thus, he never has his mind demoralized and, with great
intensity, he gives rise to the intention towards liberation in the case of living beings.Again
he thinks as follows: “These defilements have no power and ability. They are powerless,
of weak power. They have no real foundation at all. These defilements are [produced] by
incorrect discrimination. These defilements, when they are inspected by the real and correct
perception, cannot be excited by any means. They should he investigated by us so that
they might not contaminate again. Indeed, it is a good thing not to he contaminated by defilements,
not a good thing to be contaminated.If I were contaminated by defilements, how
could I teach the Doctrine for the sake of the living beings who are bound by the bondage
of defilements, in order to remove these bondage of defilements ? Oh! Really, we are not attached
to defilements; therefore, we shall teach the Doctrine to the living beings in order
to remove the bondage of defilements.And moreover, in order to bring the living beings
to their maturity, we should be attached to the defilements, by which we are bound to the
world of transmigration, which are at the same time endowed with the roots of virtues”.

§5. ’Samsara’ in the Case of Bodhisattva. And here, the expression ‘World of transmigration’
implies the three kinds of Body made of mind in the Immaculate Sphere, being an image similar
to thats in the Phenomenal World. Indeed, it is the World of Transmigration because it
is manifested under the influence of immaculate roots of virtue. At the same time, it is
the Nirvāṇa because it is not manifested under the influence of the passionate Active Force
and Defilements.With regard to this point, it is said :“Therefore, O Lord, there is the
Phenomenal World, conditioned as well as unconditioned. There is the Nirvāṇa, conditioned
as well as unconditioned”. Here, being endowed with the manifestation of mind and mental
states mixing both, the conditioned and the unconditioned, this is called ‘the pure and impure
state’.§6. Bodhisattva in His 6th Stage. And this state is predominantly established
in the th Stage of Bodhisattva called Abhimukhl ready for the Enlightenment. Because, [in
this Stage], the Bodhisattva, facing the acquisition of the Extinction of Evil Influences
through his practices of unobstructed Highest Intellect and the Great Compassion, still does
never realize that acquisition in order to protect all living beings.

With reference to this Wisdom for the Extinction of Evil Influences, there is an illustration
of a castle in the Scripture. It runs as follows:... omission. Thus, through the origination
of the Great Intention [towards the Nirvāṇa] by great efforts and exertion, the Bodhisattva
gives rise to the Supernatural Faculties. Having the mind purified by the contemplation
and Supernatural faculties, he becomes ready for the Extinction of Evil Influences.Having
cultivated the Wisdom for the Extinction of Evil Influences in order to rescue all living
beings through the origination of the mind of Compassion, he, with perfectly purified
mind, produces the unobstructed Intellect in the th Stage and again becomes ready for the
Extinction of Evil Influences. In this way is explained the ‘pure’ state of the Bodhisattva
who has obtained the power for realization of the Extinction of Evil influences in the
[th] Stage of the Bodhisattva named Abhimukhi.[On the other hand], he, though having practiced
correctly for his own sake, still wishes to save the living beings who are on the wrong
way, owing to the Great Compassion, saying: I will lead the others also to this true practice.
While cultivating the means for the bliss of the Quiescence, but not in order to taste
it [by himself] he turns his face away from Nirvāṇa, for the sake of the living beings
who are facing the world of transmigration.Though abiding [in the desireless World of Form]
with [ kinds of] contemplations in order to accomplish the factors for the acquisition
of Enlightenment, he voluntarily asumes again the existence in the World of Desire and wishes
to work for the sake of living beings as quickly as pośible.[Thus] he has obtained the
power for manifesting the body of ordinary beings by asuming various births [even] in the
form of animals. From these points mentioned above his state is explained as ‘not perfectly
pure’.

The Pure and Impure State of the Bodhisattva in comparison with the Ordinary Being and the Buddha.
Another interpretation of the verse. There is another meaning of the śloka Kārikā,
v.. The son of the Buddha, though having understood that This Absolute Essence is unchangeable,
Is still perceived by the ignorant In the appearances of birth, etc.: This is really
wonderful! ||Having attained the position of the Saints He is nevertheless seen among ordinary
beings; Therefore, he is, for the friends of all the world, The Highest Means and Compassion.
|| ||Being superior to all kinds of worlds, He is nevertheless not apart from the
world, He acts in the world for the sake of the world Without being affected by the worldly
pollution. || ||Just as a lotus flower growing in the water Is not polluted by the latter,
Similarly, though having been born in the world He is never polluted by worldly matters.
|| ||His intelligence is always burning like fire For bringing about the welfare [to the
world]; At the same time, he is always practicing Meditation and concentration on the Quiescence
; || ||Owing to the continuing force of the previous life, And because of being
free from all discriminations, He does not use any exertion at all For bringing the living
beings to their maturity. || ||The Bodhisattva, knowing who is to be trained In what manner
and by what means [Performs it] in the proper manner: By means of teaching, of two apparitional
forms, By conduct [of ordinary life] or by religious observances. || ||In such a
way, he does always, With no effort and with unobstructed Wisdom, Bring benefits for the living
beings Among the world, limitless like the sky. || ||Having obtained this position,
The Bodhisattva becomes equal to the Tathāgata On account of his act of conveying the living
beings In various worlds, to the other shore. || ||There is however a great difference
Between Bodhisattvas and the Buddha, Such difference as lies between the atom and the earth,
Or in [the water] in a footprint of a bull and in the ocean. || ||

Of these ten verses taken respectively, [the first] verses refer to the comparison [of the state
of Bodhisattva] with the absolute impurity of those who rank below the lst Stage of Bodhisattva
named Pramudita Joy, and the th verse refers to the comparison with the supreme
purity of the Stage above the [th] Stage of Bodhisattva named Dharmameghd Cloud of Doctrine
i.e. the Stage of the Buddha.[In comparison with the states, both below and above], there
is explained in brief the purity and impurity of the four kinds of Bodhisattvas in the
Stages of Bodhisattva. The four kinds of Bodhisattvas are as follows: He who has resolved
upon the acquisition for the first time; He who is practising the way towards the acquisition;
He who has ascended the irreversible stage, and; He who is expected to be the Buddha
in the next birth.Here, by the first and second verses, there are explained the pure characteristics
of qualities of the Bodhisattva who is abiding on the Stage of Pramuditd resolving
upon the acquisition for the first time, because [in this stage] he has understood the
highest supermundane Essence which had never been seen before since beginningless time.By
the third and the fourth verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities
of the Bodhisattva who is practising the way to the acquisition in the Stages beginning
with [the 2nd named] Vimalā up to [the 7th named] Dūraṃgamā (Far-Going), because [in these
stages] he practises the unpolluted practices.By the 5th verse, there are explained the pure
characteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who has got the irreversible state in
the [th] Stage named Acald Immovable, because [in this stage] be has firmly stood in the meditation
as the practice immediately connected with the acquisition of the Great Enlightenment.By
the 6th, 7th and 8th verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities
of the Bodhisattva who is abiding on the th Stage named Dharmameghā, being expected
to be the Buddha in the next birth, because [in this last stage] he, having attained the ultimate
point of means for fulfilling all the benefits for his own as well as for others,
is connected with the Stage of the Buddha by one and the last birth on account of the acquisition
of the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment.By the 9th and 10th verses, there are explained
the equality and difference between the purity of qualities of the Bodhisattva who has
reached the ultimate point with regard to the aim of others and of his own, and that of the
Buddha’s qualities.

(C) Unchangeability in the Perfectly Pure State. Now, we have one śloka with reference to the
meaning of ‘unchangeability’ in the perfectly pure state [of the Buddha]. Kārikā This [Essence
of the Buddha] is of unalterable nature Because it is endowed with inexhaustible properties,
It is the refuge of the world Because it has no limit in the future; It is always
non-dual Because it is indiscriminative, Also it is of undestructible nature Because its
own nature is not created [by conditions]. || ||What is shown by this śloka? It is not born,
nor does it die; It does not suffer [from illness], nor is it decrepit. Because it is
eternal, Everlasting, quiescent and constant. || ||Being eternal, it is not born Even with
[the form of] the Body made of mind, Being everlasting, it does not die Even with the Inconceivable
Transformation. || ||Being quiescent, it has no suffering From the illness of subtle
defiling forces, And, being constant, it does not become decrepit By the accumulation
of the Passionless Active Force. || ||

Indeed, this Essence of the Tathāgata, in case it is abiding on the Stage of the Buddha which
is absolutely immaculate, pure and radiant by its own nature, is ‘eternal’ in regard to
its beginning. Therefore, it is never born even in the form of Body made of mind.Being ‘everlasting’
in regard to its end, it does not die in the manner of the inconceivable Transformation.
Being ‘quiescent’ in regard to both, beginning and end, it never suffers from illness
depending on the Dwelling Place of Ignorance.Thus, not falling into misery, it is ‘constant’
, and consequently never becomes decrepit through the transformation brought about
by the Passionless Active Force.

Here, the meaning of Eternity, etc. In regard to the immutable Sphere Is to be known, respectively,
By each couple of terms. || ||

Of these four terms, namely ‘eternal’, ‘everlasting’, ‘quiescent’ and ‘constant’, the distinction
of the meaning of each term in regard of the Immutable Sphere is to be understood by
each couple of terms showing ‘statement’ and ‘explanation’, respectively, according to the
Scripture.It is said as follows: “This Absolute Body, O Śāriputra, is Eternal since it is
of unalterable nature through its inexhaustible properties. This Absolute Body, O Śāriputra,
is Everlasting, the everlasting refuge, because it exists as far as the farthest limit.
Being of indiscriminative nature, O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body is Quiescent, of nondualistic
nature. Being of uncreated nature, O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body is Constant, of
undestructible character”.

(X) ASAMBHEDA The Essence of the Tathāgata characterized as having reached the ultimate point
of perfect purification in this pure state is of undifferentiated nature. With reference
to this meaning of ‘undifferentiation’ we have one śloka. Kārikā It is the Absolute Body,
it is the Tathāgata, Also it is the Holy Truth, the Highest Nirvāṇa; Therefore, being indivisible
from qualities like the sun with its rays, There is no Nirvāṇa, apart from the Buddhahood.
|| ||§1. Synonyms of the Essence of the Tathāgata. Here, what is shown by the former
half of the śloka ? It should be known, in brief, There are synonyms, the Absolute Body
and others Since [the Germ] in the Immaculate Sphere Has four meanings from different aspects.
|| ||

In short, there are four meanings in regard to the Matrix of the Tathāgata as the Immaculate
Sphere or Essence. In accordance with these meanings, there should be known synonyms. Then
which are the meanings?

It is indivisible from the Buddha’s Properties, Its Germ has been perfected as it is, It is
not of false, deceptive nature, And it is quiescent from the very outset. || ||

1) The first meaning: [the Essence of the Buddha] is indivisible from the Buddha’s properties.
With reference to this meaning, it is said as follows “Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata
is not empty [because it is endowed] with the Buddha’s Properties which are inconceivable,
indivisible, inseparable [from Wisdom] and are greater in number than the sands of the
Gaṅga”.2) The second meaning: Its Germ, i.e. the Innate Nature has been perfected in an inconceivable
manner. With reference to this point, it is said as follows: “[This Germ], having
attained the Absolute Essence, has come down since beginningless time from one existence
to another existence aśuming various forms consisting of six organs of cognitions, i.e.
in the form of various living beings”.3) The third meaning: It is not of false, deceptive
nature. With reference to this point, it is said as follows: “Here, that which is the Highest
Truth is Nirvāṇa, whose nature is undeceptive. For what reason? Because the Germ is eternal
by its being quiescent”.4) The fourth meaning: It is of the nature of absolute quiescence.
With reference to this point, it is said as follows: Being in Nirvāṇa from the very
outset, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, ie Perfectly enlightened One is of neither origination
nor destruction. For these four meanings, there are four synonyms, namely, the Absolute Body;
the Tathāgata; the Highest Truth, and the Nirvāṇa, respectively.It is said as follows:
“The Matrix of the Tathāgata, Śāriputra, is the name for the Absolute Body. “Lord, the Tathāgata
and the Absolute Body, these both are not different from each other. The Absolute
Body is, Lord, nothing but the Tathāgata”. “Under the name of the Extinction of the Suffering,
Lord, there is indicated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, being endowed with such
properties”. “The Sphere of the Nirvāṇa, Lord, is the name for the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata”.

§2. The Point: Buddhahood is Nirvāṇa. Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka? Being
the Perfect Enlightenment in all aspects, And being the removal of pollutions along their
root, Buddhahood and Nirvāṇa Are one and the same in the highest viewpoint. ||||

These four synonyms of the Immaculate Essence converge into the undifferentiated meaning of
the Essence of the Tathāgata. Therefore, these four are one in their sense, and hence, by
means of the Doctrine of nonduality, the following fact is to be known.Namely, that which
is called ‘Buddhahood’ because of its Perfect Enlightenment regarding all kinds of phenomena,
and that which is called ‘Nirvāṇa’ because of its removal of pollutions along with their
remaining forces which takes place simultaneously with the Perfect Enlightenment, these
two are non-dual, indivisible and inseparable in the Immaculate Sphere.[So it is said]: “Liberation
is of the characteristic Indivisible from the properties, which are Of all kinds,
innumerable, unthinkable and immaculate ; This Liberation, that is the Tathāgata”. Also,
it is said in the Scripture with reference to the Nirvāṇa of the Arhat and Pratyekabuddha:
“[Here], O Lord, the Nirvāṇa is merely a means used by the Tathāgata”.By this passage it
is explained that this [Nirvāṇa of the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas] is a means made by
the Perfectly Enlightened Ones who have the highest Controlling Power on [all] phenomena
in order to protect them i.e. Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas against retreat; it is just like
the illusory city in the forest made for the travellers who are tired after their long way
[in order to encourage them].[On the other hand] it is said: “By reason of having attained
Nirvāṇa, O Lord, the Tathāgatas, the Arhats, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones are endowed
with properties showing the ultimate point of the entireness, immeasurebility, inconceivability
and purity”.By this passage it is explained that, having realized the Nirvāṇa which
is characterized as being inseparable from the accomplishment of properties of four kinds,
the Perfectly Enlightened Ones identify themselves with Nirvāṇa; therefore, as both of these,
Buddhahood and Nirvāṇa, are endowed with inseparable properties, no one can realize
Nirvāṇa apart from Buddhahood..§3. The Parable of the Painters. Now, in the Immaculate Sphere,
the Buddhas are possessed of all kinds of properties since they have accomplished the
Non-substantiality endowed with all sorts of excellency. This is here to be known through
the illustration of the painters.

Suppose there were some painters, [Each of them] expert in, a different sphere, So that whatever
skill possessed by one of them, The others could not understand. || ||Then a mighty king
would give them A painting cloth with the following commandment: On this [cloth] ye all
should draw my portrait. || 89 ||Then the painters, having promised [to the king], Would
start their work of painting. Of these [painters] engaged in this work, One would have gone
abroad. || 90 ||Because of his absence during his This picture would remain Without the
completion of all parts; Thus the parable is made. || 91 ||The painters who are meant here
are Charity, Morals, Patience and other dispositions, Being endowed with all kinds of these
excellencies, The Non-substantiality is called the picture. || 92 ||

Here, of these [excellent virtues], charity and the rest, each one is differentiated into limitless
varieties in accordance with the Buddha’s Sphere [of activity]. Therefore, it should
be known as ‘immeasurable’. On account of its number and power, it should be known as being
‘inconceivable’ and, having exterminated the remaining force of pollutions, by its enemies,
in the form of’ envy “ etc., [each virtue] is to be known as being ‘pure’.Now, through
practice by means of Meditation on the Non-substantiality endowed with all sorts of excellencies,
the Non-origination of [all] the elements is realized. Because of this realization,
[Bodhisattvas can] ascend to their 8th Stage called Acalā (Immovable), where they can
get the knowledge of the Path which is indiscriminative, faultless, without any break and
bearing its own taste. On the basis of this knowledge, the entireness of Buddhas’ properties
in the Immaculate Sphere is completed.On the Stage of Bodhisattva called Sādhumati (perfect
Knowledge), by means of immeasurable forms of Meditation and magic formulas like the
ocean, they can obtain the knowledge for aśuming the immeasurable properties of the Buddha.
On the basis of this knowledge, the ‘immeasurability’ of [Buddhas ‘] properties is completed.
On the Bodhisattva’s [last] Stage called Dharmameghā, basing himself upon the knowledge
revealing the secret state of all the Buddhas, the ‘inconceivability’ of Buddhas’ properties
is completed.Immediately after this stage, on the basis of knowledge which leads
to the liberation from all impediments on account of Defilements and Knowables along with
their remaining forces, aiming at the acquisition of the Stage of Buddha, the highest ‘purity’
of Buddhas’ properties is completed. As the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas cannot perceive
these four knowledges, the foundations of these Stages [above Acalā], they are said
to be far from the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa characterized as being indivisible from the accomplishment
of the properties of the [above mentioned] four kinds.

(§4. Similarity of the Buddhahood to the Sun.) The Intellect, the Wisdom and the Liberation
Are [respectively] bright, radiant, and clear, And they are inseparable from [the Absolute
Essence]; Therefore, they are similar to the light, The rays, and the disk of the sun. ||
93 ||

That which is indicated as the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa characterized as being inseparable from
the accomplishment of four kinds of properties through the Intellect, the Wisdom and the
Liberation, is explained to have similarity to the sun in four aspects, namely, by three aspects
on account of the Intellect, etc., respectively, and by one [in general].Here in the
Buddha’s body, 1) The transcendental Intellect which is supermundane and indiscriminative
is, through its engaging in the destruction of darkness [that hides] the highest true Essence
of everything cognizable, akin to the light [of the sun]; 2) The Wisdom of Omniscience
which is attained subsequently is, through its penetrating everything knowable of all kinds,
without exception, akin to the radiance of the net of rays;3) The Liberation of the
Innate Mind, the basis of the above two Intellect and Wisdom, has a resemblance to the purity
of the disk of the sun through its being perfectly free from pollution and its being radiant;
and 4) As these three are undifferentiated from the Absolute Essence, there is a similarity
the light and others through their indivisibility [from the sun].

Therefore, without the acquisition of Buddhahood, There is no attainment of Nirvāṇa, Just as
it is impośible to see the sun, Avoiding its light and rays. || 94 ||

Thus, within the Essence [of the Buddha] which is endowed with the virtuous qualities as its
own nature constantly aśociated since beginningless time, there exists the Essential nature,
of the indivisible properties of Tathāgatas. Therefore, unless the Buddhahood, i.e. the
true introspection by the Intellect free from attachment and of no hindrance, is understood,
the acquisition will not take place, i.e. the realization of the Sphere of Nirvāṇa characterized
as the liberation from all the impediments, just as we cannot see the disk of
the sun without perceiving its light and rays.

Therefore, it is said: “O Lord, there is no acquisition of the Nirvāṇa for [those who maintain]
the inferiority or superiority of [all] thc elements. The acquisition of the Nirvāṇa is,
O Lord, available [only] to [those who know] the equality of all the elements. [In other
words], O Lord, it is for those who have the Wisdom of equality, those who have the liberation
of equality, or those who have attained the true introspection through the liberation
of equality. Therefore, O Lord, it is said the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is of unique taste,
of equal taste. That is to say, [it is of one and the same] taste with Wisdom and Liberation”.

