VI. THE GERM OF THREE JEWELS IN FOUR ASPECTS

Immediately after the explanation of the Three Jewels, there is one śloka with reference to
the question, in what circumstances are there born the Three Jewels, what is the birth-place
of purity, mundane and supermundane.

(Kārikā 4) The Reality mingled with pollution, And [the Reality] apart from pollution, The Immaculate
Qualities of the Buddha, and his Acts; [These are the four aspects of] the sphere
Of those who perceive the Highest Truth, From which arise the pure Three Jewels. || 23 ||

What is elucidated by this śloka ? The Germ of these Three Jewels Is the sphere of the Omniscience,
And it is inconceivable in fourfold For four reasons, respectively. || 24 ||Here,
1) ‘The Reality mingled with pollution’ is a term for ‘the Essence, unreleased from the sheath
of defilements’, i.e. the Matrix of Tathāgata. 2) ‘The Reality apart from pollution’
is a term for the same Essence, when it is characterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis
in the Stage of Buddha, i.e. the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. 3) ‘Immaculate Qualities
of the Buddha’ means Supermundane Qualities of the Buddha 10 Powers and so on in this
Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, characterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis. 4)‘The
Buddha‘s Act’ means the automatic, highest act of these Qualities of the Buddha, 10 Powers,
etc., which continues to give prophecies to Bodhisattvas, without end, without interruption,
unceasingly. And also, these four subjects are inconceivable for four reasons, respectively;
therefore, they are called the Sphere of Omniscience Then, for which four reasons
?

(§1. Inconceivability of the Subjects.) Because, [the Germ is] pure but defiled [at one and
the same time], [The Absolute Body is] of no impurity, and yet purified, [The Qualities are]
of inseparable nature [from the Absolute Body], and [The Acts are] effortless and of no
discrimination. || 25 ||

Here, 1) ‘the Reality mingled with pollution’ is always, at the same time, pure and defiled;
this point is inconceivable. [Here, ‘inconceivable’ is] in the sense that even for the Pratyekabuddhas
who believe in the way of profound Doctrine, this is not an understandable sphere.
Because it is said:“O Goddess, these two points are quite difficult to be cognized.
It is difficult to be cognized that the mind is pure by nature. It is also difficult to be
cognized that this very mind is defiled. O Goddess, those who can hear these two points
[with understanding] are only either yourself or Bodhisattvas who are endowed with the great
qualities. O Goddess, for the other Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, these two points are
to be understood only through the faith in the Tathāgata”.2) ‘The Reality apart from pollution’,
though it is originally not defiled by pollution, yet it is purified afterwards; this
point is inconceivableable. Because it is said: “The mind is clear by nature. This is the
real knowledge as it is. Therefore it is said: [the Tathāgata] perfectly enlightened the
Supreme Perfect Enlightenment by the Intellect endowed with contemplation at one moment”.Next,
‘Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha’ are always found even in the stage of those ordinary
people who are absolutely defiled, of no differentiation through the inseparable nature
[from the Absolute Body]; this point is inconceivable. Because it is said:“There is no
one among the group of living beings in whose body the Wisdom of the Tathāgata does not
penetrate at all. Nevertheless, as taking [wrong] conceptions, he cannot cognize the Buddha’s
Wisdom [residing in himself]. By removing this taking of conceptions, the Wisdom of Omniscience,
self-born Wisdom, makes its appearance again unobstructedly.O Son of the Buddha,
suppose there would be a big painting cloth, of the size equal to the Great 3-thousand thousands
of Worlds. And indeed, on this big cloth, the whole Great 3-thousand thousands of
Worlds would be described completely. The Great Earth would be described in the exact size
of the Great Earth. The 2-thousand Worlds [would be written] in their own full size.[In
the same way] the thousands of Worlds, the Four Continents, the Great Ocean, the Southern
Continent of Jambū, the Eastern Continent of Videha, the [Western] Continent of Godāvarī,
the Northern Continent of Kuru, the Mount Sumeru, the Palace of Gods living on the earth,
that of Gods living in the Sphere of Desire, and of Gods living in the Sphere of Form; all
of these would be written in their own size.And [thus] this big cloth would have the same
size as the expansion of the Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds. Furthermore, this very
big cloth would enter within one particle of an atom. Just as this big cloth lies within
one small particle of an atom, in the same way, in each of all the other particles of atoms,
too, there enters a big cloth of the same size.Suppose there should appear one person,
well learned, clever, intelligent, wise and possessed of the skill to approach there i.e.
to the big cloth. And his divine eyes were perfectly pure and clear. With these divine eyes
he would perceive [and say]: Why does this big cloth of such a great nature stay here in
such a limited small particle of an atom! It is of no use to anybody!So he would think: “Now,
I will break this particle of an atom by the force of great efforts and let this great
cloth become useful for the world. Then, producing the strength of great efforts, he would
break this small particle of an atom with a subtle diamond and would make that great cloth
useful for the world as was his intention. Not only for one particle of an atom but also
for [all] the remaining atoms, he would act in the same way.Similarly, O Son of the Buddha,
the Wisdom of the Tathāgata, which is the immeasurable wisdom, the profitable wisdom
for all living beings, thoroughly penetrates within the mentality of every living being. And
every mental disposition of a living being has the same size as the Buddha’s Wisdom. Only
the ignorant, however, being bound by misconceptions does neither know nor cognize nor
understand nor realize the Wisdom of the Tathāgata [within himself].Therefore, the Tathāgata,
having observed the state of all the living beings in all the universal region by his
unobstructed Wisdom, resolves to be a teacher [and says:] ‘What a pity! These living beings
cannot cognize properly the Wisdom of the Tathāgata, though it penetrates them. O ! I shall
try to withdraw all the obstacles made by wrong conceptions for the sake of these living
beings through the teaching of [8-fold] Holy Path, in order that they would by themselves,
by accepting the power of the Holy Path, cast off the big knot of conceptions and would
recognize the Wisdom of the Tathāgata [within themselves], also that they would obtain equality
with the Tathāgata’.[In accordance with this declaration], they remove all the obstacles
made by wrong conceptions through the teaching of the [Holy] Path of the Tathāgata.
And when all the obstacles created by wrong conceptions are withdrawn, then this immeasurable
Wisdom of the Tathāgata becomes useful to all the world”.Now, ‘the Buddha’s Acts’ proceed
forth at one time, everywhere, always, without efforts, without discrimination, according
to the intention [of the living beings], according to [the faculty of] the living beings
who are to be disciplined without fault, in conformance with their merits, this point
is inconceivable. Because it is said:“In order to enroll the living beings [in the Buddha’s
Doctrine] the Acts of Tathāgata, though they are unlimited, are taught as if they were somewhat
limited, with summarized numbers.However, O Noble Youth, that which is the true act
of the Tathāgata is immeasurable, inconceivable, uncognizable by all the world, indescribable
by letters, difficult to be acquired by others, established in all Buddhas’ lands, rendered
in equality with all the Buddhas, far beyond all works of exertion, of no discrimination
as being equal to the sky, of no differentiation as being the act of the universal
Essence “ &c.Then, after showing the example of pure, precious Vaidūrya stone, it is taught
as follows:“O noble youth, in this manner, this Buddha’s inconceivable Act should be known
as rendered in equality [with all the Buddhas], nowhere blamable, related to the three
divisions of time, and not interrupting the lineage of the Jewels.Residing in this inconceivable
Act of the Tathāgata, the Buddha never casts off the sky-like nature of his body and
be shows himself in all the Buddhas’ lands; without casting off the indescribable nature
of his speech, he teaches the Doctrine for the sake of living beings through the proper word-communication;
and being apart from all objects of the mind, still he can understand the
deeds and intentions of the minds of all living beings.

(§2. The Germ as Cause and Conditions of the Jewels in its four Aspects.) The object to be enlightened,
the Enlightenment, The attributes of the enlightenment, The act to instruct the
enlightenment ; [Of these four], respectively, One subject signifies the cause, [The remaining]
three are the conditions For the purification of the former. || 26 ||

Indeed, of these four subjects, with reference to their inclusion of all knowable objects, the
first subject should be known as ‘the object to be enlightened’. The second subject, ‘the
Enlightenment’ should be known in the sense that the object to be enlightened has been
awakened, therefore it is the Enlightenment. Being the portions of enlightenment, they are
called Buddha’s attribute; in this sense the third subject, ‘the attributes of the Enlightenment’
is to be known.Only through the attributes of Enlightenment is there instruction
for others; in this sense the fourth subject, ‘the act to instruct the Enlightenment’ is to
be known. Thus with reference to these four subjects, the arrangement of the Germ of the
Jewels in the state of cause and conditions is to be known.Here, of these four subjects,
the first one, as being the seed of the supermundane things, should be understood as the cause
of origination of the Jewels with reference to its (= of the Germ) purification based
upon ‘each own’ correct thinking. Thus “one subject signifies the cause”. How are there three
conditions?The Tathāgata, having realized the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment, manifests
the Act of Tathāgata of features, being endowed with the Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha,
Powers, etc. This is to be understood as the condition for the origination of the Jewels
with reference to the purification of Germ based upon the voice of others. Thus “[the remaining]
three are the condition”. Hereafter, of these four subjects, a detailed and analytical
explanation will be made known in the remaining chapters.

