V. THE THREE JEWELS AS REFUGES

Now, for what purpose and for the sake of whom did the Lord teach the Refuges?

In order to show [the virtues of] The Teacher, the Teaching and Disciples, With reference to
those who belong to Vehicles And to those who devote themselves to religious observance Three
Refuges were taught‘) [by the Lord]. || 19 ||

(§1. Refuges from the Empirical Standpoint.) The teaching: “the Buddha is a Refuge because he
is the highest among human beings”; it was established, in order to show the virtue of the
Teacher, for the sake of those people who approached the nature of Buddha i.e. who belong
to the Vehicle of Bodhisattva and those [people who] devote themselves to the highest religious
observance of the Buddha.The teaching: “the Doctrine is a Refuge because it is the
highest of what are devoid of passions”; it was established, in order to show the virtue
of the Teaching of the Teacher, for the sake of those people who approach the enlightenment
of profound Doctrine of the dependent origination by [depending on] themselves, i.e. who
belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and those who are devotees to the highest religious
observance of the Doctrine.The teaching: “the Community [of the disciples] is a Refuge
because it is the highest of communities”; it was established, in order to show the virtue
of Disciples well enrolled in the Teaching of the Teacher, for the sake of those people
who approach in order to understand the voice heard from others, i.e. who belong to the
Vehicle of Śrāvaka, and those who are devotees to the highest religious observance in the
Community.Thus, in short, for these three purposes, for the sake of six kinds of people,
distinctively did the Lord establish the teaching of these three Refuges from the empirical
standpoint, in order to make living beings enter the regular method.

(§2. The Doctrine and Community are not the Ultimate Refuges.) As being abandoned, being of
deceptive nature, Being non-existence and being possessed of fear, [respectively], The two
kinds of Doctrine and the Community Are ultimately not the highest Refuge. || 20 ||

The Doctrine has two kinds, i.e. the Doctrine as Teaching and the Doctrine as Realization. Of
them, the Doctrine as Teaching is [the Doctrine] of Sūtra and other teachings and it consists
of the collection of name, word, and letter. And it is said that this Teaching is akin
to the boat because it ends with the acquisition of the Path.The Doctrine as Realization
is [again] twofold by the division of cause and result. That is to say, the Truth of Path
and the Truth of Extinction in the sense, ‘by which realized’ and ‘that which in realized’,
[respectively]. Of them, the Path is included in the artificial character. That which
is included in the artificial character is of false, deceptive nature. That which is of false,
deceptive nature is untrue, that which is untrue is not eternal, and that which is non-eternal
cannot be a refuge.And the Extinction realized by this Path also represents, according
to the system of Śrāvaka, the mere absence of Defilement and Suffering, just like the
extinction of a lamp. Also, a non-existence cannot be a refuge nor a non-refuge.‘The Community’
is a term for the community [of the Saints] belonging to three Vehicles. And they
are always possessed of fear, because, as learned people, they have taken refuge in the Tathāgata
and are seeking for deliverance; [but still] they have [many] things to be done and
are approaching (i.e. have not yet realized) the Highest Perfect Enlightenment.How are
they possessed of fear? As the Arhats (the Saints of the Vehicle of Śrāvaka), though having
extirpated rebirth, have not yet destroyed the Impression [of Defilements], there therefore
exists always and constantly a strong notion of fear in all physical life, as if standing
in face of the executioner with raised sword. So they have not attained the ultimate delightful
Deliverance.Indeed, [that which is] a refuge [by itself] never seeks for refuges
[in others]. Just as living beings, having no refuge, are frightened by this or that fear,
and consequently seek for the Deliverance, similarly even the Arhats have their fear, and,
being frightened by fear they take refuge in the Tathāgata. And thus one who seeks for
a refuge because of his being possessed of fear, will inevitably seek for the deliverance
from fear.And as being a seeker of deliverance, with reference to the destruction of the root
of fear, a learned man is ‘one who has things to be done’. As being a learned man, he
is ‘one who has undertaken’ to attain the fearless, highest state, i.e. the Highest Perfect
Enlightenment. For this reason, the Community, being a partial refuge, cannot be the ultimate
refuge. Thus these two Refuges, (i.e. the Doctrine and the Community), are called ‘temporary
refuges’.

(§3. Only the Buddha is the Refuge from the Highest Standpoint.) From the ultimate standpoint,
Buddhahood is the sole Refuge of the world, Because the Sage has the body of the Doctrine,
And because in that the Community sets the ultimate goal. || 21 ||

As has been said before, the Sage, represented as neither becoming originated nor disappearing,
is endowed with the body of the Doctrine, liberated from passions and [characterized]
as the Two Truths of purification (i.e. the Truth of Path and the Truth of Extinction), and
in the purity of this Body of the Doctrine (= the Absolute Body, dharmakāya), the Community
[of the Saints] belonging to the three Vehicles sets the ultimate goal of acquisition.Therefore,
from the ultimate standpoint, that which is the imperishable Refuge, eternal Refuge,
and everlasting Refuge, which lasts as long as the utmost limit in the unprotected and
refugeless world, is [only one], that is to say, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly
Enlightened one. And this teaching of the unique, eternal, ever-lasting, quiescent and unchangeable
Refuge is to be understood in detail according to the Āryaśrīmālā-Sūtra.

(§4. The Meaning of the ‘Jewels’.) [They are called] ‘Jewels’, because Their appearance is difficult
to obtain, They are immaculate and powerful, And because of their being the ornament
of the world, And being the highest and unchangeable. || 22 ||

In short, by the sixfold common nature with Jewels, these three named Buddha, Doctrine and Community,
are called ‘Jewel’. That is to say, 1) through the common nature of their appearance
being difficult to obtain; because those people who have not ripened the root of virtue
cannot get any chance to meet them, even during a long succession of aeons.2) Through the
common nature of being immaculate; because they are apart from all kinds of dust. 3) Through
the common nature of power; because they are endowed with the quality of unthinkable
power, the Supernatural Powers and so forth. 4) Through the common nature of being the ornament
of the world; because they are the cause of beauty intended by the whole world.5) Through
the common nature of being superior to the artificial jewel; because they are supermundane.
And 6) through the common nature of being unchangeable by praise, blame etc.; because
of their non-artificial nature.

