X. THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA

§1. The Saying: All Living Beings are Pośeśed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata is the Highest
Logical Truth.) Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, being united with the Absolute Body, having
the characteristics inseparable from Reality, and being of the nature of the germ properly
fixed [towards the attainment of the Buddhahood], exists everywhere, at whatever time
and without exception among the living beings, this is indeed to be perceived in the light
of the Absolute Essence as the [highest] logical ground.It is said: “O noble youth, such
is the Essential nature of the elements. Whether the Tathāgatas appear in this world, or
whether they do not, these living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata”.That
which is meant by this ‘Essential nature’ is here synonymous for the ‘argument’,
the mode of proof and the means [of cognition], in the sense: such is the real state of things
and not otherwise. In any case only the Absolute Essence is the resort for the contemplation
of the mind, only the Absolute Essence is the argument for the proper understanding
of the mind. This Essence itself is not accessible to imagination nor to discrimination.
It is accessible only to faith.

(§2. The Kinds of Individuals to Whom the Faith in this Essence is Necessary.) The Highest Truth
of the Buddhas Can be understood only by faith, Indeed, the eyeless one cannot see The
blazing disk of the sun. || 53 ||

In brief, there are four kinds of individuals who are defined as being blind with regard to
the perception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. Who are these four? They are namely: 1) the
ordinary beings; 2) the Śrāvakas; 3) the Pratyekabuddhas; and 4) the Bodhisattvas who have
recently entered the Vehicle.It is said: “O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not the
accessible sphere for those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the
existence of individuality, for those who are attached to delusion, and for those whose mind
has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality”.Here, ‘those who have fallen into
the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality’ are the ordinary
beings. Indeed, having fully admitted those elements claśified into [5] groups and others,
which are possessed of Evil Influences, as being the real Ego and its belongings, they are
clinging to the conception of ‘Ego’ and, ‘Mine’, and, due to this conception, they cannot
believe even in the Immaculate Essence which represents the annihilation of the [conception
of the] existence of real individuality.Being so, how is it pośible for them to cognize
the Matrix of the Tathāgata which is the object accessible only to the Omniscient? There
is [absolutely] no room for it. Now ‘those who are attached to delusion’ represent 2) the
Śrāvakas and 3) the Pratyekabuddhas. Why?Because, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is
to be considered as ‘eternal’ in its transcendental sense, they indulge in the contemplation
of the ‘evanescence’ [of the phenomena 30)] instead of meditating upon the ‘eternity’
of the former. Likewise, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘blissful’
in its transcendental sense, still they indulge in the contemplation of the ‘suffering’
[of the phenomena] instead of meditating upon the ‘bliś’ of the former.Although the Matrix
of the Tathāgata is to be regarded as ‘the [highest] Unity’ they nevertheless cling to
the practice of meditation on the idea of ‘non-Ego’ [of the separate elements] instead of
concentrating their mind on the notion of the Unity of the former. And, though the Matrix
of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘pure’ in the transcendental sense, they devote
themselves to the practice of meditation on the notion of the ‘impurity’ [of the Phenomenal
World] without doing meditation on ‘Purity’ of the former.Thus, in such a way, all the Śrāvakas
and Pratyekabuddhas are attached to the Path which is quite opposite to the realization
of the Absolute Body, and hence the Essence [of the Tathāgata] which is characterized
as the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity, and the Supreme Purity, is
said not to be accessible to them, too.About this inaccessibility of the Essence to those
who are attached to delusion, i.e. who have the notion of Evenescence, Suffering, Impersonality
and Impurity [as the almighty maximum], the Lord has made it clear in detail in the
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra with the example of a jewel in the water of a pond.

It runs as follows: “Suppose, for instance, O monks, that in the hot season, the people, putting
on the bathing underwear, were playing in the water with various ornaments and equipments
for their individual pastime. Suppose then, someone would cast into the water the genuine
Vaiḍūrya stone. Thus, in order to get this Vaiḍūrya stone, all the people, leaving aside
their ornaments, would dive into the water.They would mistake pebbles and gravels in the
pond for the real jewel, seize them and draw them out, thinking: I have got a jewel. After
having stood on the bank of the pond, they would notice: It is not the real jewel at all!
At that moment, the water of that pond would, owing to the power of that jewel, shine
as if water itself were shining, and seeing that water sparkling, they would say: O the jewel
is still there [in the water], and would notice how that jewel had great quality.Thereafter,
one who is experienced and clever would really get the jewel out. In the same way,
O brethren, ye who are ignorant of the real Essence of things, maintaining the general conception
that all things are evanescent, that there is only suffering, and that everything
is impersonal and impure, practise the meditation [on that conception] repeatedly, and increasingly.
But all that was attempted by you, [ye should keep in mind], is [in reality] of
no use.Therefore, O monks, ye should become skilful in order not to be determined by this
[false conception] like the pebbles and gravels in the pond. O monks, with those elements
which ye maintain to be in every case evanescent, suffering, impersonal, and impure, and
on which ye practise the meditation [on that notion] repeatedly and increasingly, there exists
[an Essence which represents] the Eternity, the Bliss, the Purity, and the Highest Unity”.
Thus should be understood in detail, according to the Scripture, the teaching of the
incorrectness with regard to the feature of the highest true nature of the elements.

Lastly, ‘those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality’ denotes the
Bodhisattvas who have recently entered the Vehicle, [since] they are deprived of [the cognition
of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality.They
are the people who look toward Non-substantiality as the medium of Liberation in order
to destroy the substance, thinking that the perfect Nirvāṇa means the Extinction, i.e.
the destruction of the elements [for the Phenomenal Existence] in future.There are also some
people among them who think that there is something substantial called ‘the Non-substantiality’
which is quite different from ‘form’ and other [elements], and that is the one which
we should understand, upon which we should meditate, and, fancying Non-substantiality
in this way, they are persuaded of Non-substantiality.

(§3. The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as Representing Non-substantiality.)
Then how is what is called here ‘[the cognition of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard
to the true meaning of Non-substantiality’? Here there is nothing to be removed And absolutely
nothing to be added; The Truth should be perceived as it is, And he who sees the Truth
becomes liberated. || 154 ||The Essence [of the Buddha] is [by nature] devoid Of the accidental
[pollutions] which differ from it; But it is by no means devoid of the highest properties
Which are, Essentially, indivisible from it. || 155 ||

What is explained by this? There is no defiling element which is to be removed from this Essence
of the Tathāgata, perfectly purified by nature, since it is by nature devoid of accidental
pollutions. Also, there is no purifying element which is to be added to it, since it
is by nature indivisible from the pure properties [of the Buddha].On account of this point,
it is said [in the Scripture]: “The Matrix of the Tathāgata is devoid of all the sheath
of Defilements which are differentiated and separated [from the Absolute Essence]. The Matrix
of the Tathāgata is by no means devoid of the Buddha’s Properties which are indivisible,
inseparable [from the Absolute Essence], inconceivable and far beyond the sands of the
Gaṅgā in number”.Thus, wherever something is lacking, this is observed as ‘void’ in that
place, whatever remains there, one knows that this being must exist here: This is really the
true [conception of Non-substantioality]. [Thus], by removing the extremities of affirmation
and negation, the real characteristic of Non-substantiality is explained by these two
verses.Now, those individuals whose mind has deviated from this principle of Non-substantiality,
and, turning in various directions, neither meditates nor concentrates upon it, we
call them by this very reason ‘those whose mind has deviated from [the true conception of]
Non-substantiality. Indeed, without the introduction to the knowledge of the highest truth
of Non-substantiality, nobody can attain or realize the non-discriminative Sphere [of
the Tathāgata].Implying this point, it has been said: “The Wisdom cognizing the Matrix of
the Tathāgata is nothing but the Wisdom about Non-substantiality of the Buddhas. And this
Matrix of the Tathāgata has never been seen, has never been realized by the Śrāvakas and the
Pratyekabuddhas” &c.Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, inasmuch as it represents the Matrix
of the Absolute Essence, is said to be a sphere not accessible to ‘those who have fallen
into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality’, because the
Absolute Essence is an antidote against such erroneous conception.Inasmuch as it represents
the Matrix of the Absolute Body, or the Matrix of the Transcendental Element, it is said
not to be accessible to ‘those who are attached to delusion’ since the Transcendental Element
is spoken of as being an antidote against the mundane elements of such nature as evanescence,
etc.[Furthermore], inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the properties, perfectly
pure by nature, [the Matrix of the Tathāgata] is said not to be accessible to ‘those
whose mind has deviated from Non-substantiality’ since the [Buddha’s] pure virtuous Properties,
being represented by the Transcendental Absolute Body which is indivisible from them,
are by nature devoid of accidental pollutions.Here, to perceive that the Transcendental
Absolute Body is perfectly pure by nature, by means of the cognition of the unique introduction
to the Wisdom which is Essentially connected with the Absolute Essence, implies here
the True Intuition. On account of this perception, it is said that [even] those Bodhisattvas
who are abiding in their 10 Stages can [but] slightly understand the Matrix of the Tathāgata.Indeed,
thus it is said: “[ O Lord], thou art unable to be seen fully, Just as here
the sun, in the sky with torn clouds, Even by the Saints, of pure intellectual vision, Since
their intellect is still partial; O Lord, only those whose Wisdom is illimitable Can completely
perceive thy Absolute Body Which pervades everything knowable That is infinite like
space”.

